
Yoga Sutras 
with the commentary of Vyasa and 
the gloss of V%haspati MiSra 
Translated by 
with an introduction ji-m 
A 
Rai Bahadur SriSa Chandra Vasu 
Publishers Pvt Ltd 

ISBN 8 1-2 15-0424-4 
This edition 1998 
Originally published in 1912 by 
Panini Office, Allahabad 
\ 
01998 Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi 
All rights reserved, including those of translation into foreign languages. 
No part of this book may be.reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopy- 
ing, recording or otherwise, without the written permission of the publisher. 
Printed and published by 
Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers Pvt. Ltd., 
Post Box 5715,54 Rani Jhansi Road, New Delhi 110 055. 

r 
I 
INTRODUCTION. 
! 
/ 
The aphorisms of Patgiijali on the Yoga SCltras are. contained in 
four chapters and are nearly two hundred in number. Tlm author of 
the aphorisms is said to be the same Patafijali who wrote the famous 
cot~men 
tary on P+igi's aphorisms, under the name of the Mahtibliihya 
I 
or tlm Great Commentary. Another work is also attributed to him-the 
great work on Medicine. If so, he was not only a great Grammarian 
and a great Philosopher, but a Great Physician. He prescribed for the 
body, mind and spirit all three. The age of Pataiijali is now generally 
fixed at three centuries before Chris~.* 
The word Yoga CO rnes from a Sanskrit root which means " to go to 
traoce, to meditate." 
Others however derive it from a root- wllich means 
to join ; and Yoke iil English is said to be the same word as Yoga., Both 
roots are feasible-in 
the case of the root to join, Yoga would mean the 
wience that teaches the method o f ,  joining the .h urnan soul with God. 
The philosoplly of Patafijali is essentially Dualistic. 
The Jivas or 
Purusas or human egos are separate individual entities and exist from 
eternity ; so is also Pralryiti, and so alsohhra or God. It thus believes 
in three Eternal CO-existent principles, the God; the Man and the Matter. 
But man is found to be involved in matter, to have fallen from its 
pristine state of purity. The aim of Yoga is to free (viyoga) man from the 
meshes of matter. But the highest form of matter is mind-the 
C itta 
(a term which wo+uld include that which is teclinically known as manas, 
as Ahamkbra and as Buddhi). The students of Sbhkhya need not be told 
that the first product of Prakyiti or the-root-matter is Mahat or the Great 
Principle-the 
Buddhi, then comes the AhamkBra or I-principle-the 
lrlettm through which can function the I-ness : and then the Manas or 
I ,  
tllo matter which is the vehicle of thought. These three vehicles-the 
though t-vehicle (Manas), 
the Evehicle (A hamkbra), the Pure-Reason- 
vehicle (Budd hi)--constitute Chitta or the subtlest form of Matter. To 
Irm inan from the fetters of this Chitta is thus the problem of Yoga. 
l 
The man when freed from all vehicles, remains in his own form 
A 
(*allc:tl SvtlrQpa. It is not made of 1 mkritic matter. It is the body which 
I d o ~ q e  to man-is 
part of man from eternity-the 
body in which he 
W- 
- 
* 
* W Dr. Rajendra Lala Mitra's preface to his Edition of the Yoga Aphorisms of 
Y l f r f i J ~ l l  and also his paper on Uo~iktiputra and Uonardiya as names of Pataiijali, pp. 361 
et rt~l., ot bhe Journal of the hiatic Society of Bengal far 1888. 

INTRODUCTION, 
dwells in Mukti in super-celestial worlds. It is the body in which the 
Triune God is directly active-Idrara, 
Priiqa and Bri-or 
the Father, the 
Son and the EIoly Ghost. This svarapa-deha, 
is the body of I'rBqa-the 
body of Christ of the (hostics. This is the incorruptible undecaying 
body, the spiritual body. 
But when man is not in his Own-Fo?m (SvarCipa), ire functions 
naturally in the lower vehicles, and his form is there the form of his vehicles 
-whether 
it be of Buddliic, Ahamkbric or Mbnasic matter. In fact the man 
of Psychology is this triad-Ahatpkiira, 
Buddhi and Manas. 
The human consciousness in whatever lower body it may function 
is always a dual consciousness-it 
must be alternately pleasurable or 
painful. Pleasure and pain are the marks of consciousness functioning 
in Chitta. The Svartipa consciousness is only above all pains. 
Next to this primary division of a11 consciousness, as regards their 
nature ; the consciousness as regards its quality is five-fold:-(l) 
it may be 
a true consciousness of some objective reality-something 
which is out- 
side the man and his vehicles ; or (2) it may be an incorrect consciousness 
of outward reality ; or (3) it may be a ldlucination ; or (4) it may be non- 
perception of anything external but of rest; or (5) it may be the reviv- 
ing of old perceptions. 
In other words, the .consciousness looked at 
from the subjective or emotional point of view is either pleasurable or 
painful ; looked at from the objective or cognitional point of view it is+) 
true perceptions, (ii) false percept ions, (iii) hallucinations, (iv) sleep, and 
(v) memory. 
l 
Thus both the emotional and the intellectual aspect of the Chitta-a 
or the Triune Man is to be checked. But how is it to be checked. The 
answer is by constant practice and want of attachment or Dispassion. 
Theremust be constant exertion to keep the mind on. one point. This 
is called Abhy8sa. The intellectual functioning of the Chitta is to be 
checked by Abhybsa-putting 
the mind to think of one object, and as 
soon as it strays away from it to bring it back again to the same point. 
This practice or Abhyasa, steadily persevered in, would make the mind 
onepointed, with the help of Viveka or discrimination. 
As regards the emotional sides of the mind, it murlt be checked by 
VairDgya or dispassion. Pleasure or Pain, attraction or repulsion, love 
and hatred can be controlled only by this world-weariness--realisation that 
there is nothing in this world or the next worth striving after, worth 
desiring or worth hating. The highest for111 of VairCigya will be attained 
when one will realise his separateness from all Prbkritic vehicles-when 
he can say " I am not Body, or Desire, or mind, or Reason or I-ness." 

iii 
-- 
Thg state of Samddhi or trance induced by Practice and Dispnsuion 
is two-fold-Snmprajfiiilta 
and Asampraj iiffts. In the first, the man ha8 
shut off f r o u  his consciousness all external impressions, but his internal 
S self-initiated activities have not ceased. In the other, oven these are 
stopped. 
There are some entities whose consciousness is in a state of SamC 
dhi naturally, who have not to acquire it by any exertion. These ar e the 
classes of beings called Videlms and Pmkri tilayas. Their consciousness 
is cosmic. The Videhas are Devas. They are AIukta from the begin- 
ning : but in some future Kalpa they may come into the world-cycle. 
The Prakri tilayas are Adhikbri Pnrugas, the great office-holders in the 
cosmic hierarchv. 
D, 
They are the perfect ones of the past Icalpa. 
i n  tlle case, however, of ordinary entities-for 
the Videhas and the 
Pralqitilayas do not stand in need of Yoga- the method of suppressing 
Chitta-functions consists in having faith, energy, retentivee-memory, medi- 
tation and wisdorn. Orle must cultivate these qualities in order to 
become a successful YogP. 
The success is quicker according to tlie arnouut of energy put in 
by the person in his practice. 
But the best and the safest method of 
Yoga is the love of God. 
Loving God mith all oue's heart and soul, 
would quickly bring aboutthecessation ofall mental functions. 
God is 
a spirit untouched by sorrow, action and its fruition. He is Omniscient, 
He is the Teacher of all, and from eternity. His mystic name is Onl. 
One must recite this Om constantly meditating on its letters and their 
imports; and tllus all obstacles to concentration will be removed, and 
the Inner Self will manifest itself. The obstacles to concentration are 
disease, languor, doubt, heedlessness, laziness, sensuality, delusion, &cw, 
mentioned in I. 30. Hut when tile mind is concentrated, there is no pain 
or despondency, no fidgetiness, no difficulty of breathing. 
To attain 
concentration aud remove these obstacles, the aspirant must practise to 
fix his attention on One Point, One Truth. Of course the highest 
'Cruth is God and so the constant atthude of the mind ~hould be God- 
ppinted. 
The aspirant must strictly regulate his conduct as regards othere. 
110 must show happinees and feel happiness when dealing mith those 
who aro happy. Let him have no feeling of jealousy towards them. 
Ha 
~ n u ~ t  
H ~ O W  
compassion towards those who are suffering. He must not 
ba crrllous to the miseries of otlle1"~. He must be complacent towards the 
virtuous, and hate not the sinner. These are the moral attributes that he 
~ u u e t  try to cultivate. 

INTRODUCTION. 
There are, however, some particular methods which quickly bring 
about concentration ; one of them is the regulation of the breath. The 
monotony of slowly breathing ill and breathing out brings about hyp- 
nosis. Fixing the attention on various parts of the body, such as the tip 
of the nose, palate, &C., are also helpful. The astral senses are deve- 
loped by this means, and when the practitioner gets first-hand lrnowledge 
oE astral sights, sounds, &C., his doubts are removed, and he feels more 
earnestness in pursuing the path. 
If the astral development is not wanted, the practitioner may 
concentrate his attention on the light in the heart : and upon the thought 
" I am." This also steadics the mind. 
Or he lnay fix his attention on some great and holy saint or sage- 
such as Zoroaster, the Ruclclha, the Christ, &c. 
Or he may fix his attention on the objects of his dreams. Some- 
times in dream he may be shown a great Deva or a great Teacher. 
Let him not reject it as fancy. By fixing his attention on it he may 
acquire steadiness of mind. 
Or lie may fix his attention on the ideas that pass through his mind 
just before he goes to sleep, the pictures that arise when one is half-awake 
and half-asleep-the 
hypnopompic (as b1yers calls them). Or he may fix 
his attention on the pictures that one sees just before awakening-the 
hypnogogic. If he c m  fix his attention on these, he may easily pass into 
hypnosis. 
By such concentration all mental impurities are removed, and the 
mind becomes like a pure crystal that reflects truly ancl correctly all 
objects that are presented to it. They are no longer distorted pictures 
or dim and dull reflections of outer verities. The mental vehicle L 
purified, and the knowledge that now arises ia far more true than 
any knowledge that he had before. 
The mind, however, enters as an- 
element in every such knowledge, and the. past ideas and memories 
tinge such knowledge. This state is called Savitarka or mixed up 
trance. But when the mind reflects only the object, without adding 
to it anything from its own associations and storehouse, it is pure 
idea and is Nirvitarlra Samadhi. 
In this state the light of the Self shinea 
out on purified mind. It is not only a pure crystal that faithfully reflects 
the outer objects, but it $ illumined, as if it were, by a light which was 
dormant within its own inmost centre. Such a mind is called the Truth- 
bearing mind. It has truth within it and truth without-a mass of truth 
-a 
tree carrying the fruit of truth-a 
female full with truth. Up to this 
time the objects of the mind were mere ideas and inferences, mere thoughts, 

INTRODUCTION. 
4 
Now the contents of the mind are things, the very things as it mere, and 
not merely thoughts of things. The mind modifies itself, as it were, into 
- 
l 
the very thing itself; and thus the thicg is known more truly and eesenti- 
ally than it was known ever before. 
In this state of mind, the time 
and space cannot impede the perception of the object. The object may 
be inside a box, behind a wall or hundreds of miles off, the m i d  faithfully 
reproduces it. The object may be the subtlest and the minutest, not visi- 
ble even under the strongest microscope, the mind reproduces it. For it 
no longer depends upon the senses for its knowl&e, 
but has become the 
all-sense itself. In this way the mind becomes the highest sensory :- 
+ 
by constant practice the mind gets into the habit of reflecting the trance 
objects. But even this habit is ultimately to be conquered if one wishes 
to rise to the higher levels of what is called the seedless trance. 
The First Chapter thus, in fifty-one aphorisms, gives what may be 
called the theory or the science of Yoga. An ardent and intelligent person 
can learn enough from this chapter alone to become a practical Yogin. 
But for men of ordinary intellect, more detailed teaching is necessary, 
The Second Chapter enters into such teaclling. It may be called the art 
of Yoga-the 
technique of it. 
The art of Yoga consists in bringing under control and purifying 
the three lower vehicles of man, namely, the body, the mind and the 
spiritual Self-the 
astro-physical, mental, and the causal bodies. The 
astro-physical body is to be purified and brought under control by what 
are called ascetic practices,- early rising, bathing, fasting, bearing hard- 
ships, etc., in short, all that go under the name of Tapas-or 
austerities. 
Themental body must be purified and strengthened by study, by acquir- 
ing knowledge. An ignorant person carmot be a Yogl. The causal or 
epiritual body is to be developed by entire devotion to God. Thus an 
atheist cannot be a true YogP. 
These three helps-austerities, 
study and resignation to the will of 
flod-facilitate 
trance and remove " afllictions." 
The " affliction " is the 
technical izarne of certain intellectual and emotional weaknesses to which 
ull human beings are liable. They are five in number :-(l) The first is the 
Nwcience or Wrmg Notion of things objective-mistaking 
the non-eternal 
for the eternal, the impure for the pure, the painful for the pleasurable, 
h o  non-Self for the Self. (2) The second is the wrong notion about things 
HIII 
)jnctive-identi fying one's Self with the vehicles in which the Self 
~wt,ion~, 
taking the bodies fm the soul. These two are intellectual defects, 
(3) 'l'tlo third is the emotional weaknessn It is the desire uatural of man, 
I*U I 111 i 
af tcr pleasa11t things. (4) The fourth also is emotional- hatred of 
- 
a 

vi 
INTRODUCTION. 
things that give pain. Thus these two-love 
and h a t r e d a r e  emotional 
defects. The fifth defect is neither intellectual nor emotional-it 
is instinc- 
tive-the 
instinct of self-preservation-the 
infitillctive fear of death-the 
9 9 
love of life. These are the five " afflictions 
of Y ~ g a - $ ~ i d ~ & ,  
Asmit&, 
Rbga, Dvesa and Abhiniverla-Nescience, 
Egoism, love alld hatred and 
instinctive dread of death. These " afflictions " are destroyed by meditation 
and the methods already mentioned. 
\ 
These " afflictions " are the root of the body of transmigration, the 
root of re-incarnation, of birth, life and suffering. The pleasure and pain 
which a man suffers are the result of his past acts, the virtuous acts are 
t 
the seed of pleasure, the vicious of pain. The word " aflliction" is t h u ~  
a purely technical term, for it includes t.he high heavenly pleasure also 
which is the result of virtuous actions. But in tlie philosophy of Yoga- 
l 
as we1 as that of S:ihkllya--all such pleauares are also coosiderecl as pains : 
because philosopllically the world is painful, all its experiences, even those 
which people call pleasurable, are painful to the philosopher. This is 
stated in the memorable aphorism, 11. 15, p. 100. 
,411 world-experience being thus painful, the philosopher seeks to 
find the root-cause of this experience and this is the conjunction of the 
kuomer and the knowable-the 
Self and the not-Self. 
Because man is tied 
with mind, and cannot extricate himself from the embraces of mind-matter 
that he suffers. When he masters the mind, and is not her slave, then 
there ie no pain-there 
is no necessary experiencing of joy and sorrow. 
~h~ noll-eqo to whic-h the man is tied has the three well-known attributes 
or G ~ ~ ~ ~ - - t h e  
Sattva, Rajas and Tamas- the Light, the Activity and 
the Inertia-is 
the source of all elements, and producer of all sensations 
and senses. 
The Yoga system of 
cosmogony is the same as that of the 
SLhkhya, so far as the evolution of the world-elements out of the 
Prilnordial matter called Pralqi ti is concerned. It is summarised 
in 11. 19. 
What is the llature of the Self ? This qnestion naturally arises after 
ono has learned the nature of the ncin-Self. 
The man is pure consciousness : 
I 
and the non-Self exists for him. If man is pure consciousness, how does 
he perceive the non-&lf ? He ~ I ~ O W S  
the non-ego by a sort of reflex ac- 
tion. The mind catches the reflection of the non-Self ; and the man be- 
\ 
comes cocscious of that reflection. The man is thus the seer of the 
pictures in the mind. The 11011-ego or the knowable thus exists for the 
wb of the Man. In the ~ t a t e  of Mukti, there exists no knowable for that 
Mou. Though to the Perfect Mau there is no knowable, it does not 

INTRODUCTION. 
vii 
mean that the knowable ceases to exist. It exists with regard to the other 
souls that have not reached perfection. 
I 
A question is often asked : If the ultimate goal is the separation of 
man from the non-Self, the lmowable, why was this conjunction between 
the two brought about ? Why was man tied down to non-Self, to matter- 
mind ? The answer to this is : In order that Man may perfect his nature by 
acquiring all experiences and passing through them. Unlese the Man 
learns all that the Matter-Mind has tb teach, the conjunction is not 
broken. The effective cause of this conjunction lies in the AvidyI-the 
Wrong Notion. When, therefore, the AyidyL or Nescionce is removed, the 
. conjunction is removed and the Man shakes off the eternal burden. Efow 
is the Avidys to be removed? The AvidylZ being Wrong Notion, can be 
removed only by Right Notion call Viveka-Khydti or Discriminative 
knowledge.   his discriminative lrnowledge has seven stages-four 
deal- 
ing with the phenomenal knowledge and three with the mental or subjec- 
tive notions, as described in 11. 27. It is on reaching this that the title 
of Adept or I<u$aln isgiven to the Yogi. 
The acquisition of this Adeptship is through the practice of eight- 
fold Yoga. The famous phrase AgtBhga Yoga refers to this. The eight 
accessories of Yoga are enumerated in 11. 29. 
Five of these are external, 
as 
with the last three. The eight Ailgas are so important 
that it can well bear repetition here. 
First, Practise Restraint, i.e., be moral. This restraint or Yama con- 
sists of five sub-divisions :-(a) do not kill or injure m y  being. Be kind 
to all. AhimsB; (b) Speakandact truth; (c) Stealnot, nor acquireillicit 
gains ; (d) 'Practise continence and celibacy ; is) Be not avaricious. These 
are universal rules. 
Second Niyama of Observance. This is also five-fold :-(a) 
Be clean 
in body and mind, (b) Be contented, (c) Practise asceticism and austerity, 
(d) Study sacred books, (e) Be devoted to God. 
1 
While practising Yama and Niyama, if obstacles arise, always try 
to think of the opposite quality. If he feels a strong desire to tell a 
falsehood, let him not fight the desire, by a frontal attack, by checking it. 
Let him substitute the opposite desire-the 
beauty of truthfulness. If 
he hates another, let him think of the good qualities of that man. If he 
is in danger of breaking the vow of celibacy, let him think of the glorious 
future of the BrahmachhrP. Pratipakaga Bhkum-thinking 
of the con- 
trary-is 
the key of success. It is the great strategy in this moral battle, 
and is ernbodied in 11. 33. The moral qualities mentioned in Yama, must 
be absolutely observed-no 
sophistical diminution of their absolute nature 

- ,- --- . 
is allowed to the Yogi. To him the moral laws are absolute. Thus the 
first rule of AhimsS says " kill not." 
This is an absolute rule. There can- 
not be any exceptions or reservations. The enemiep of the country, the 
renegades of religion, the blasphemers of sages and saints, the murderer, 
the criminal-kill 
none. To Yogi the vow of non-killing is absolute. He 
must not kill even in self-defence oE himselE or of his near and dear onea 
Hence the rule says : " They (Yama) are the great vow uaiversal, and not 
limited by caste, country, age and condition." 
( 11. 31. ). 
So also with 
truth. One must not lie for the sake of one's country or State or Brbhmaya 
or cow, &c. 
Not only this : there are certain omissions which become 
as bad asactual 'colnruissions of these sins. He incurs sin if he causeg 
another to do it or permits its being done. 
The third Anga of Yoga is Asana or posture. 
No particular pos- 
ture is obligatory, but the posture must be such as is steady arid easy ; 
not painful or irksome. The various p:)stures given in books of Hatha 
Yoga such as Gheranda 
. . Samhitb or Siva Samllitii are useful as physical 
exercises, for -the otherwise sedentary Yogi. 
The fourth Ahga of Yoga is the mudh abused PrLqbyhma or the 
Regulation oE breath. 
The Yoga has come to mean, in the thoughts oE 
many, posturing and nose-closing. But the right regulation of breath as 
a mental and physical effect waa pointed out long ago. The Western 
science has come to recognise its advantages and Boolrs of Breathing 
are not as rare now as they were when we first wrote about it in 
1882. 
The fifth ilhgil of Yoga is PratyLhbra or Abstraction. It is a state 
uf cat-alepsf when the senses do not come into contact with their objects. 
It is the'state of the inhibition oE the senses. 
A pistol may be fired near 
the ear of the Yogi and he will not hear it. 
Arnrnonia may be held under 
his nostrils and he will not smell it, and-so on. 
.. 411 the above five are Bahirahga or the external. The internal 
Yoga which has to deal with thk mind and mind alone corisists of the last 
three Ahgas-DhbranS, 
Dhydna and Sambdhi. 
The Third Chapter gives a description of this Antauahgayoga. The 
L)Mmn&, DhyBna and Satnbd!li are collectively called Samyama. 
+ 
When the stage of catalepsy is reached, the Yogi fixss his mind on 
any particular portion oE his body. This holding the mind in a particular 
part is Dhlraub or concentration. 
The coutinuation of the mental effort to keep the mind there is 
L)llyrtnrr or meditation. 
'his meditation 
(Dhydna) turns into Sambdhi or contemplation 

when the Self is lost as if it were, the object of meditation done remains 
in the mind and sliines out alone. 
This Samyama-concen tration, med i ta tion and contemplative trance- 
is the great irlstru~nen t of acquiring all knowledqe 
< of supersensuous verities. 
It is the strong searchlight of the mind tvliicli turned on any object, 
reveals its inmost core. 
It is the 
C -  great light Q£ wisdom--Raj fiillolra. 
This Snmyama must be applied to plane after plane of nature, 
phjsical, astral, mental, c .  One cannot jump to a higher plane, leaving 
03 an intermediate plane---the progress is gradual. 
The Yogi who has mastered Samya~ns as regards a higher plane 
i 
should not desecrate this faculty by employing it in lower planes. He 
who by Samyarna, has learnt commnnion with God, should not waste his 
faculty in thought-reading, clairvoyauce, bringing messages from the dead 
to the living or vice versa. He should not squander his energy in hunting 
up the past records in the astral light, nor the shadows of 
C -  
the future in 
the Brbhmic Idea. 
Wl~at is the ~ t a t e  
of mind in Samaclhi and Nir~dha ? Is it a state 
of perfect quiescence of the mental body ? 
A s  regards the mental body 
it is 3 state of perfect stillness so far as the vehicle is concerned, but it is 
a state of great moZecula~* motion in the mental body itself. The molecules 
of the mental body are thrown in a very high state of vibration, tllough 
the body in all appearance is in perfect calm. 
I 
This vibration of the mo- 
lecules of the mental body, becomes by practice, rhythmic and this rhyth- 
mic flow is h e  mental peace of Samildhi. The swing of the vibration lies 
between one-poin tedness and all-poin tedness-- between the contraction 
to a point and expansion to embrace a whole universe. 
That which ap- 
pears to he the stillness of Sambdhi is perhaps the highest activity possible. 
Even what is called one-pointedness is itself a state of utmost activity. 
When the mind is one-pointed it does not mean tlmt one idea is indelib- 
/ 
ly irnpres~d 
on the mind like an engraving on a stont, but that the mind 
is working so quickly that the image of one is formed in no time as it 
were, destroyed in no time as it were, and formed again. This quick succes- 
eiou of the same form is one-pointedness. 
In ordinary states one idea is 
followed by another idea. In one-pointedness the same idea vanishes 
and re-appears again and again. Thus what is called fixing the mind to 
L 
a thought is really making the mind reproduce one thought over and over 
again, in the utmost quickness of succession, without the intrusion of any 
foreign thought. 
The Third Chapter then gives a list of psychic powers and h o ~  
to - 
rrqaire them by applying Samyama. The power of knowing the past, 

X 
' 
INTRODUCTION. 
present add future ie by making Samyama on three-fold modifications 
which all objects are constantly undergoing (ITI. 13). 
Methods are laid down aa how to acquire the memory of past births, 
how to read the thoughts of others, how to disappear from sight, how to 
get ~trength, how to see through closed doom, how to know the solap 
system and astronomy, &c,, &c. 
These methode have a meaning only for 
him who knows the practice of Sarpyama. Without that no amount of 
thinking on the sdar plexus will give one s knowledge of internal 
anatomy, &c. 
Tlie Fourth Chapter deals with Kaivalya or final emancipation-the 
realisation by Man that he is separated from Mind_Matter. 
The psychic powere or Siddhis are either innate, or produced 
through the means of medicinal ddruge, or suggestion of Mantra, or asce- 
ticism or contemplation. Some are born psychice, as Kapila, Sweden- 
borg, &c. Tetnporarg psychic powers may be acquired through anaes- 
thetics, such as chloroform, hashish, &c. Psychic faculties may be 
developed by the recitation of certain Mantras, or the suggestion of sound. 
Some persons have acquired psychic powere through austerities. The 
fifth or contemplation is the method of this Yoga ~ystem. 
The born psychics are those who had practised Yoga in their past 
lives. They are like eggs in which the bird has already fully formed- 
break the shell and the bird comes out. But ordinary men are eggs that 
require hatching for lives to develop the bird. The born psychics are 
like a field by the side of a reservoir of water on a higher level. It only 
requires the opening of the sluice to flo~d the field with water. It 
only requires some exciting cause to make a born psychic a developed 
Yogl. 
Ordinary men are, however, like fields, which are away from any 
source of water, and which require to be irrigated by bringing water from 
a distance, with great exertion, in this life. A Yog?, having attained the 
power of Sarnhdhi, sets about destroying his past Karmas. 
All Karma8 
may be divided into three classes :-(l) The acts done in the past whose 
consequences the man must suffer in the present life : the Karmas to 
expiate which he has taken the present birth or incarnation. They are 
the ripe Karmas (Prbrabdha). (2) The Karmas done in the past, but which 
are not ripe, and will have to be expiated in some fature life. They are 
the stored Karmas or unripe (Saiichita). (3) The Karmas which a man 
create8 in his present life, and which have to be expiated in a future or 
the present life. This last kind of act- the fresh Karmas, a 
be stop- 
ped. By devotion to the Lord and doing everything in a spirit of *er- 
vice, no j~fresh Karmas are generated. The incurring of debt is stopped 

INTRODUCTION. 
'I'he man, however, has to pay off past debt8 -the ripe and unripe Karmas. 
The ripe Knrmas will produce their effects in the pwsent life. The Yogi 
does not trouble himself about this. But the unripe or stored Karmas 
roquire a future birth, It is here that the Yoga is of the greatest prw- 
ticnl importance. The Yogi is not bound to wait for future lives in 
order to get an opportunity to pay off the debt of Saiichita Karmas. He 
rimul taneousl y creates Ar,L the bodies that those Saiichita Karmas require 
-through 
those bodies expiates all his Karmas simultaneously. Every 
one of such body has a Chitta or m e n t n l i ~  of hie own. 
This is the 
Nirrnd~~a-chitta 
or the Artificial mind-like 
the Pseudo-Personalities 
of hypnotic trance. 
These artificial minds arise simultaneously like 
u, many sparks from the Ahamkriric matter of theeYogi's Self, and they 
ensoul the artificial bodies created for them. These artificial bodiee 
with artificial minds in them mdk through the earth in hundreds- 
they are distinguished from ordinary men by the fact that they are 
perfectly methodical in &l1 their acts, and automatic in their lives. All 
these mtificial~ are controlled by the consciousness of the So@. One 
conscionsness controlling hundred automatons. 
Every one of these 
cru tomatons has a particular destiny, a particular portion of the Saiichita 
Karina to exhaust. As soon as that destiny is fulfilled, the Yogi with- 
draws his ray from it, and the "man" dies a sudden death-a 
heart 
fuilure general1 y. 
Now what is the difference between the ordinary mind and the 
Yoga-created mind-the 
natural Chitta and the mtificial Chi tta. The 
natural mind by experience gains a httbit, the impressions are stored in 
it and they, as VAsanRs, become the seeds of desires and activities, The 
rrtifhal miad ie incapable of storing up impressions in it. It has 
110 Viisanls and cocsequently it disintegratee as soon as the body .falls 
clown. 
The actions performed by the Yogi, through his ordinary or the 
+ ~(truordinary bodies-through 
the body with which he was born, or 
tl~rnugh the bodies which he gives birth to by Yoga power-are 
no actions 
111 the ethical sense of the word. They are not Karmas-neither 
good nor 
tluO. 
They are the paying up of the past debte, and not incurring of 
t t - w I \  liabilities. With okdinary men the actions are good or bad, or a 
t 
I re of both-white 
or black or gray, all such actions produce their 
I I  g t --particular kind of birth, particular length of life period, particular 
F 
h I tv l rr of life experiences-or 
produce their effect as tendencies to certain 
i 
L i rd of actions, Both kinds of effects constitute the fate or the destiny 
!,I illua, 

xii 
Tendency is memory. The essence of memory is converted into ten- 
dency. The tendencies with which a man is born are the extracts of all 
the memories c-f a particular kind. The events of the past life are .not 
remembered, but from the tendencies of the present life one can easily 
infer what tllose. events must hare been to give rise to these tendencies. 
The surgical operation may be forgotten, hecause performed under 
chloroform, or in infancy, but from the nature of the cicatrix one can 
irifer what must have been the nature of the operation. 
Therefore, the 
Smri ti {memory) and BamskBra (tendency or habit) are really one (Eka- 
riipatva)-IV. 
9. 
Acts produce habits, habits lead to acts-the 
circle of 
VBsan3 is eternal, and beginningle'ss. Is it possible. to break this chain 
of habits and acts, acts and habits ? JiiBna is the only means. Through 
I 
Jfifiua alone is possible to destroy this inexorable chain of causation. 
Now what is this Jiibna or wisdom ? It is the realisation of the 
distinction between the Purusa or Spirit, and Prakriti or mind-matter- 
energy. Purusa is pure consciousness or rather Chitdakti--power 
of 
consciousness. 
By his proximity t 
Prakri ti (mind-energy-matter) it 
induces in the latter his quality. This induction takes place in the 
purest part of Pralrriti in the Buddhic-essence (the mental portion of 
Prakriti) : Just as soft iron becomes magnetised by its proximity to iron. 
Thus C hi t-dakti or consciousness is two-fold,-the 
pure consciousness of 
I 
the spirit or spiritual consciousness and the consciousness of the Buddhi- 
I 
sattva or mental c~nsciousness. The pure Buddhissttvn (devoid of Rajas 
and Tamas) reflectDs the spirit and appears likes spirit and is mistaken for 
it. The Jfidna consists in the discrimination of this difference realising 
that the Chitta is the instrument and not the, Self. In the state of SamC 
dhi, when this highest kn9wledge is realised, then arises the positive 
actilyity of the Spirit. Up to this time the effort was in a sense negative 
onlv- 
C 
separating the Spirit from mind-energy-matter. 
When this separa- 
' tion is realised, then the Spirit manifests its own attributes fully. This 
manifestation of the attributes (dharma) of the Spirit on its own plane 
I 
above the planes of Prakyiti (mind-energy-matter) is the highest form 
of Sambdhi. It is positive SamAdhi and is called D harma-Megha Samltdhi. 
Dharmn means highest activity, above the sphere of causation, where. the 
actions are neither white, black nor grey, an activity that leads to the 
highest end of Man-an 
activity which is the highest end of Man. It is 
c d c d  Megha or cloud, because this state of SamLclhi rains such Dharma 
-is full of Dharma and Dhartna alone. It is the cloud which showers all 
bloesings on the lower planes-while 
the Man himself bash in the Light 
of tllo Eternal Sua. Every Mukta Yogi is a Dharma-Megha-the 
Cloud 

I 
of Holiness-the 
showerer of good and nothing but good on all creation. 
4 man who has become a Dharma-Megha-a 
Cloud of Holiness,' is above all 
C 
afflictions and Karmas, his mind is free from all taints, and there is no- 
thing that is beyond the scope of his irnowledge. 
Being the Cloud of 
Dharma all attributes are known to him. 
Then the man is in his Svarfipa 
-this is Kai valya, this is Self-realisation-the 
state of true Freedom, 
though full of highest activity. Such a Man, the Dharma-Megha, the 
Cloud of Holiness, is a blessing to the thirsting humanity-nay 
a blessing 
to the whole creatioa. 
Dated, 24th February 1910. 

THE YOGA D A t t s A ~ h  O F  PATBNJALI 
WITH 
THE S~NKHYA 
YRAVACHANA COUMENTARY OF VYASA 
AND 
THE GLOSS O F  VACHASPATI 
MIBRA. 
CHAPTER T H E  FIRST, ON TRANCE (SAMADHI). 
W A tha, now,  PI Yoga, of Yoga, or concentration, condemplation (Sam& 
dhi.) V-9 
Anudbsanam, a rev'ised text, or explanation. 
1. Nowa revised text of Yoga. 
I 
" Now."-This 
word here denotes undertaking. B text giving a 
revised critical teaching of Yoga. is to be understood as having been 
undertaken. 
Yoga is contemplation (Sarn$clhi, trance), and it is a characteristic 
of the mind pervading all its planes. The planes of the mind are:- 
Wandering (I<?ipta) ; Forgetful (Mildha) ; Occasior~ally steady or clis- 
tracted (Vikgiipta) ; One-poin ted (Ekrigra) ; and Restrained (Niruddha), 

PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
- 
Of these the contemplation in the occasionally steady mind does 
not . fall under the hea?ing of Yoga, because of unsteadiness appearing 
in close sequence. That however, which in the one-poi rl tetl mind, f idly 
shows forth an object existing as such in its most perfect form, removes 
the afflictions, loosens the bonds of ltarma a d  thus inclines it towards 
restrain tl, is said to be the Cogr~iti~e 
Trance I Famprejfid ta Sandidhi). A ~ i d  
we shall explain further that this is accompanied by philosophical curiosity 
(vitarka), med i ta.t ion (vich$ra), bliss (Anandn), and egoisrn (asmi t8). 
When however all the tnodifications come under restraint, the 
trance is ul tra-cogni tive (Asampraj ridta Samiid hi). 
V~CHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
BhagavHn Patanjali here composed the aphorism, '' NOW a revised text of Yoga," with 
the object of stating briefly the subject of the treatise he desired to write, s a a t  it may 
attract the intelligent student and also that the reader may be able to nnderstand with eaae. 
The word ' Now ' (atha) the first of the sentence is explained :-" ' Now': -Thie word 
here denotes undertaking." 
This word now ' does not here denote sequence, ar it does in, " ' Now there is light." 
The word annY'Bsana ' means here a text-hook, the derivative meaning being that 
by which something is taught ; and this cannot be begun in sequence of the performance 
of mental and physical restraint. On the contrary however the desire to know and the 
knowledge of realities appear in sequeuce of the desire to explain the knowledge of 
realities. A s  says the Veda :-" Therefore let him see the self, in the self" after having 
controlled the mind and the senses and become desireless, enduring and contemplative, 
(Br. U. IV. 4. 23). 
~ l t h o u g h  it is possible that the questioning of a student t h e  performance of purifica- 
tory actions (tapas), and employment of alchemy may serve as antecedents, they are not 
to be taken as such here, because the recognition and taking up of the study by a student 
are of no use in making a treatise on Yoga authoritative. Even if there shonld be no 
student for the time being, t h e  work should be undertaken if authoritative. If however 
not authoritative, i t  should be given up, even though there be a student asking for i t  
The existence of an immediate sequence between the kiiowledge of truth and the desire 
to explain it is hereby refuted. 
If, however, the meaning is to be taken to be undertaking, then by speaking of the 
Yoga to be discussed by undertaking t h e  work, the whole meaning and object of the work 
is set forth; and t h e  student is easily informed and s s t  to work in the belief that trance 
is the means of the highest good, a s  set forth in the Vedas, t h e  S m  ritis, the Itihlsas, and 
the Pur$~as. 
The question arises, 1s the word ' Now' to be taken to mean undert*aking in all 
works? Because in that case it ~ m l d  
mean the same in the Vedknta SQtra. 
Athato BrahmajijiiLs$. 
" Now then a desire to know Brahma."--I. 1. 1. 
To meet this objection the Commentator specifies :-' This word here, &c. 
Another doubt arises. HOW is Patanjali, the author of the Yoga Teaching, when 
have it in the Smriti of the Yogi YOjfiaralkya, that Hirn~yagarbha and no other ancient 
was the original teacher of Yoga. For this reason the author of the aphorisms has used 
the word ' Anuiisans' (revised text) which means teaching aftor it has already be- 
tmght, not only teaching. 

CR. I. 
TRANCE (SAMADRI), 
I 
Becausethe word ' Now' means here an undert'aking, the Commentator says that 
the meaning is that, 'a tort giving a revised critical teaching of Yoga is to be understocd 
as having been undertaken.' 
But why should it be said that a work teaching Yoga is undertaken here ? It is Yoga 
itself that is intended to he discussed here. 
For this reason is it s:tid:-g Is to be understood, &c;' 
It is true that Yoga is spoken 
of as the subject of discussion here. It can, however, be discussed only by means of 8 
work treating of the subject. The action of the teacher works through the instrument 
and does not directly operate upon the object. n7ith the object of specifically mention- 
ing the action of the teacher, his work treating of the subject of Yoga is to be understood 
as having been undertaken. Yoga, however, is to be undertaken as the subject of the work. 
It should also be known that the hearing of the sound of the word 'atha' (now) when 
used to denote undertaking, is considered auspicious, like the sight of a jar full of water, 
which some one may be carrying. 
The Commentator now removes the doubt as to the meaning of.the word ' Yoga,' 
which arises from its ordinary connotation. Thus says he, 
Yoga is c~nt~emplation.'~ 
The word 'Yoga' is derived from the root Yuj, to contemplate, and not from the root Yujir, 
to join, in which latter case i t  wonld mean conjunction. 
Another question arises again. Trance (Sambdhi) is to be described later on 88 
being only a branch of Yoga. How can it then be that a part only may be t b e  whole ? 
The Commentator adds for this reason :-'and i t  pervades all its planes.' It is the 
word ' and ' (cha) which distinguishes the whole from the part. 
The planea are the states to be mentioned later on, the Madhum:~ti, the Madhupratikl, 
and the Viiobii. They are the states of the mind in which the potencies only are left in 
resid& in the mind. Yoga, defined as t h e  restraint of mental modifications, is present in 
all these planes, i e., in all these states of the mind. Not so the trance which is only 8 
branch of it. 
Yoga is given here only its root meaning QC &ontemplation, because the statement 
is made hero only as an incentive to study, without intending to emphasize the dietinc- 
tion between the whole and the part. The real meaning of the word ' Yoga' is only the 
restraint of mental modifications. 
For the refutation of those who say that the restraint of mental modifioationr b 
dependent upon the self, b$ reason of the modifications themselves being cognitions and 
theregore dependent: upon t h e  self, it is said :-a 
and it is a characteristic of the mind.' 
By the word ' mind' (chitta) the internal organ, the will-to-know is hinted atj. The 
power of consciousness, which is cmstant in its eternity and thus unchangeable, cannot 
have the faculty of knowledge for its characteristic. The will-to-be, which is the same as 
the will-to-know, however may. 
This is the meaning. 
Grant that, but if the Yoga pervades all the msnta1 planes, then, the wandering, the 
forgetful and the distracted planes of the mind too should be understood by tJhe word 
Yoga ' showing as they do the restraint of certain mental modifications relatively to 
the others. TQ remove this doubt, the planes to be taken and rejected as falling with- 
in ' Yoga ' are mentioned, beginning with the word, ' wandering, &C. 
t 
The wandering plane or condition of the mind is that in which it is always thrown 
by disturbing Energy (Rajas) toward% t h e s e a n i  those objects, and is thns extremely 
unutead y. 
I n  the forgetful condition. the mind is possessed of the modification of deep sleep on 
aocount of the excess of inertia (the quality of Tamas). 
The occnsioria lly steady or distracted is differentiated from the uw~dering. The dig 
ference consists in the occasional steadiness of that which is for the niost part unsteady. 

YOGA. 
This excess of its unsteadiness is either acquired, or brought about by the obstacles of 
disease, disinclination, &C., to be mentioned later. 
The one-poi,obted is that which moves along one line only. 
The restrained mind is that in which all the mental modifications have been res- 
trained, and exist only as potencies. 
Of these, the zcnnderitag and the forgetful modifications are not denied here expressly 
the status of Yoga, being far removed as they are from that state, inasmuch as notwith- 
standing the existence of relative restraint in them, they do not even form links in the 
chain of causes which lead to the highest good, and because they are in conflict with the 
nature thereof. To the occasio~zctlly steady, however, the status of Yoga is expressly 
denied, because in this case it is . possible to mistake it as such on account of its occa- 
~ional manifestation of steadiness over existing objects of knowledge. In the occasionally 
steady mind the contemplation does not; fall under the heading of Yoga consisting as it 
does only of an occasional stesdinrss of the mind over an existing object. f hy ? Because 
it is followed in close sequence by its contrary state of unsteadiness and inapplication. 
Having fallen as it does in the midst of the manifestations of a contrary class, its very 
nature becomes difficult to distinguish from -the very first as cause or effect, A seed 
which has remained in fire even for three or four seconds, will most certainly not sprout 
into leaves, even though sown. 
Which contemplative mental state is then Yoga, if not the one which follows or is 
followed closely by unsteadiness ? 
' That however which in the one-pointcd mind, &c. 
9 
The words ' existing as such ' keep out an object whose existence is only fastened 
upon the reality. The words, ' in its most perfect form ' are used to signify the best, 
i.e., that which manifests its essence to its utmost capacity. This is mentioned because 
the phenomeno~l of deep sleep also has a mind directed towards t h e  one point which is its 
then object ; that is to say, the quality of inertia (tamae) which though characterized 
by the absence of all other rneutal phenomena, does still exist as such ; and the excess 
of inertia is bad because it is the cause of the afflictions. 
The word, fully' is used to quality the words, ' ~ h o w s  forth, because the showing 
forth, i. e., the knowledge of the realities may -be accomplished by verbal and inferential 
cognitions also. Knowledge so obtained however, is not competent to remove nescience' 
(avidyii) which is directly present in the mind ; whereas inferential and verbal knowledge 
are after all indirect, the object being abseut. The word ' fully (pra) signifies intensity, 
and therefore indicates direct perceptual knowledge. The present sight of two moous 
and the doubt as to any particular direction of space go on existing, even though in- 
fereqce and authority point the other way. 
Egoism and the other afflictions have their root in nescience. The appearance of 
knowledge means the removal of nescience. Egoism and other afflictions are also removed 
. on the appearance of knowledge, because they are contrary thereto, and because the 
cause of their existence is destroyed. For t h i s  reason the words, ' removes the rf8ictions ' 
have been added to the description. 
For the same reason does it loosen the bonds in the shape of actions (karma). It is 
non-antecedent action that is desired to be understood here, by using the word denoting 
the cauee to mean t h e  effect, 
' Loosens means renders unfit for the p,rodnction of effects. It mill be said?urther, 
"It ripens into life-time, life-state and life-experience, if the root exists. "-11. 
13. 
And inclines it towards. restraint" meaus that it was not so inclined before. 
This cognitive trance is four-fold. Honce is it said, 
Thir ir acaompanied, &C.' 

I 
The ultracognitive trance is described by the words, 
When however all the modifications, &C.' 
In the cognitive trance are restrained those mental modifications of red cognition, 
&a., which are of the nature of disturbing energy and inertia (rajas a-nd tamae) : and 
this is done by resort to the class of mental modifications which are of the nature of the 
essence (sattva). In the ulh*a-cogwitiue, however, all modifications are restrained. This 
is the meaning. 
' The mental planes of Madhnmati, &C., which flnd their end inhhese tw-o states, are 
all the planes. That which pervades all these planes is called Eilrvabhauma, all-pervading. 
'im: Yogah. yoga. 
Em Chitts, of the mind, mental. 
affr Vritti, of the modi- 
fications, changes, various forms. h: 
Nirodhab, restraint. 
The following aphoi*isu~ 
mm composed with the object of formulat- 
l .  lug its definition :- 
' Yoga is the red trai 11 t of men tal modi ficatious. 
9 
Because the word, ' all ' is not put in before (mental modificatione) 
the Cognitive also is ternled 
y 
Ydga. 
6 
9 
The mind is possessed of the 
three qualities, showiilg as it does 
the nature of illuinination, nitivity.and 
i nertia. 
11cntnl Essence manifest- 
ing as ill~minat~ion 
loves power am1 objects of sense, whel~ mixed up 
with cl isturbinq energy (raj as) mid inertia 
c t,atnas). The same pierced 
through by inertia (tarnas) approaclles vice, ignorqnce, and absence of 
desirelessness aid supineness. The same shining all round with the 
veil of forgetfulness renlovecl, 1~ot affected by a torich of disturbing 
energy, approaches virtue, knowledge, desirelessnew, and rnasterfulnesa. 
The same becomes itself when the least impurity of disturbing energy 
!rajas) is removed. It then shows forth only the distinction of nature 

between the Essence of objective being and the conscious prin.ciple 
(purusa), and approaches the state oE trance called t l ~  
Cloud of Virtue 
(dharnla-megha). This the thinkers call the IIighest intellection. (Param 
prasah k h ybnam). 
The power of cotisciousness cbanges not. It goes not From object 
to object. The objects are shown to it. 
It is pure and infinite. This 
phenomenon (oE the knowledge of the distinct tiature of the t%o) is, 
i 
however, of the nature of the Objective Essence, and is the .opposite 
thereof. 
On this account the mind freed from attachment to that too, 
restrains even this form of manifestation. 
In that state it ie possessed 
of residual potencies alone. That is the seedless trance. It is called the 
ultra-cognitive because nothing is cognized 
.- 
in that state. 
This is the two-fold Yoka, tllo resti*aiiit OF mental m~dificat~ions. 
VACHASPATI~S GLOSS. 
The second aphorism is introduced by t,he w~rds, 
This aphorism was composed, &C.' 
The word ' its ' refers to the two descriptions of Yoga, mcntioned in the previous 
aphorism. 
Yoga is the restraint of mental modifications." 
That particular slate of'the mind in which the- manifestations of' real cognition, &C., 
have been restrained, is the state of Yoga. 
The question arises, is not this definition bad, inasmuch as it does not cover the 
Cognitive Trance, in which that class of mental modifications which are id the very nati~re 
of its essence (ssttva) are not restrained ? 
E'or this reason the Commentator says :-U 
Because t h e  word a11 is not put in, &C." If 
the restraint of all the mental modifications were mentioned, the definition mould not cover 
the Cogrritive Trance. The restraint of mental modifications, however, which checks the 
operation of tho vehicles of affliction, action and fruition, colnprehendv that too. In the 
Cognitive Trance also, t h e  mental modifications caused by disburbil~g Energy 
and inertia (tamae) are restrained. In fact, tho Cognitive trance is the restraint of these 
modifications. 
Why then does the one mind come into relationship with the wandering and other 
(more than one) planes ? Further, what is the object of restraining the &odidcatious of the 
mind so conditioned ? To meet this apprehended questioning, the Commentator first takes 
up the cause of the u~ind thus coming into relationship with different conditions (planes). 
The mind is possessed of the three qnalities :- 
The Bssence (sattva) is there, because it' has the nature of illumination. Disturbing 
Bnergy is there, becausc of its possessing the nature of activity. The quality of darkness 
(tarnas) is there, because of its possessing the nature of inertia. 
The lnention of the nature of illuunintrtion is suggestive. All the other qbalities, 
therefore, of the Bsseace of things (sattva), such as l~riglitness, lightness, joy and others 
are indicated. 
By activity other qualities of disturbhg Energy, such as remorse and sorrow, otc., 
are indicatecl. 
Inertia is the characteristic modification of the quality of Tamas, the opposite of 
the quality of activity. 'By the mention of inactivity are indicated heaviness, intercep- 
tion, hcl plessnese, eta. 
I 

ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 2. 
. 
The meaning is that the mind a1 though 'one, pass- 
into more conditions than one, 
because it is made up of the three qualities (gutlas) and its modifications are V ~ ~ ~ O U H ,  
because the ' qualities ' beiug unequal, fall into a variety of combinations. 
Now the Commentator illustrates so far as may be, these very planes of the mind, the 
wanderillg and others, possessing as they do differenoes of sub-states :-" Mental Essence, 
&C." 
Mental Essence meslls the Object ivo Essence (sattvn) which has evolved as mind. 
Bg saying that the mental essence has a the nature of illamination, it is shown that the 
mind has the quality of Essence (sattva) for its chief factor. 
When in the mind, the disturbing Energy and Inertia (rajas and tamas) are a little 
less predominant thall its own Essence, but equal to'each other, tohen to it are dear power 
and the objects of sense, such as sound, &C. 
The m i l d ,  on account of the Essence being 
its ruling factor, desires t o  dwell ullon reality. But because the reality is veiled by 
'
~
~
~
~
t
i
~
 
(tamas) it mistakes the attainments of Attenuation (A!limL), &C., for the reality ; 
and desires to dwell and dwells upou than for a moment. Being pnshed away, however, 
by B~lergy (rajas), even from this resting place, i t  finds not the rest sought after even 
there, but gets only a liking for them. As to sound, &C., why its love of them is well 
established as a ,natter of courso, ever inclining 8s it does towrrds them by its owl1 
nature. It is the ocoasionally steady mind that is thus d ~ c r i b e d *  
While explaining the wandering mind, the author indicates theO~orgetful 
mind also 
by words begilrniog with, g The same pierced through thereafter by Inertia, &C.' 
\Then Inerttin flows into the mind and conquers Energy, then the Energy, having 
become incapn1,lo of driving the veil of the darkness of Inertia away from the Essence 
of the mind. it is rendered lazy by the Inertia, and approaches vice, c 
Ignorance ia 
Untrue b~owledge. Barbher, the bnowluclge in deep sleep is described as depending upon 
the notioil of tiro al~sence of all of her modifications. 
Therefore the state of forgetfulness 
(the Mull115 BlrQtni) is a!so indicated. The absence of masterfulness or supineness is the 
non-fulfilment of one's wishev everywhere. The meaning is that the mind becomes 
pervadcd by 
&C. 
By the nSords, ' The same when the veil of forgetfulness, &C.,' t h e  author means that, 
wbeu the same mental Essence shilles out ill its own nature, then the mind spproaohea 
vjrtae, lr~~nwledge, 
~1esirelessnc.ss alld mwterfulness, Porgetf ulness is inertia (tarnas) 
a n d  the same is the veil. 
W b ~ p  
the veil is removed, it becomes as 
described. 
~ t ,  
is for this reason thiit it illumillatw all the specialized, the unspeciillized, the undiffeeren- 
tiated phenomenal and noumenal states and the Purusa. 
Inasmuch as notwithstandjog this, it may not be capable of manifesting yirtuo 
and masterfuhess on account of the absence of activity, the commcnt6tor says : 
- 6  when 
it is affected 13y a touch of rajas, 
The meaning is that h~,cause Energy is the cause 
of activity, virtue, &C., exist in tlhat ~ t ~ t e .  
This gives a comprehensive- description of the mental Essetlce of the two classes 
of Yogis who have reached the stage of Cognitive -Trance, the Marlhubhl[mikas and the 
I 
Pr,zjiil:yotigas of the middle path. NOW the author describes the state of mind of the 
fourth class of Yogis, t h e  Dhyhis or thinkers who have passed the domail1 of thillgs to 
be known :-- 
g The same mind becomes itself, when the least impurity of disturbing Energy is 
removed.' It is for this very reason that it becomes Bsed in its own nature. Purified of 
the dross of disturbing Energy and Inertia (rajas and tamas) by the device of heating it 
with the re-agents of practice and desirelessness, the gold of the Essence of the will-to- 
know becomes established in its own' nature, and becomes the master of the senses and 
their objects, It has thue fulfilled much of us work, but goes on working : as its great 

Pd'L'AN JALI'S Y OQA. 
work with the achievement of the knowledge of the distinction between the Objeetive 
Essence and cousciousness. 
The author says :- 
U The same becomes itself when the least impurity of disturbing Bnergy is removed. 
I t  then shows forth only the distinction of nature between the Essence of Objectiye 
Nature and the conscious principle, and approaches the state of contemplation called 
the Cloud of Virtue." 
The Cloud of Virtue will be described lafer. -He -describes here a 
term better known among the Yogis :--" This t h e  thinkerg, &C." The thinkers call the mind 
showing forth the distinction of the natures of the Objective Essence and the Conscious 
principle, and having the Cloud of Virtue as the other end, by the name of the Highest 
htellection. The mind is here spoke11 of as an abstraction, because the characteristio 
and t,he characterized are intended to be spoken of as one. 
The Commentator now shows that the potver of consciousness is the good and the 
faculty of discriminative knowledge is not the good. This is with the object of iiltroducing 
the Inhibitive Trance (Kirodhs Ssmidhi), which restrains the mental modifications df dis- 
criminative knowledge, and brings about the perfect freedom of the coiujciot~s priilciple :- 
U The power of ~oilsciousness changos not, &C." 
Impurity consists in identifying the self with pleasure and pain and forgetfulness. 
pleasure and pain both cause pain to him who discriminates; Hence they too are to be 
given up like pain. Even the very beautiful giver pain having an end. Therefore that 
also has to be given up by him who discriminates. This impurity and end do not exist 
in the pownrer of coi~sciousness or t h e  P i m p .  Hence is it said to be pure and infinite. 
But how is this power of coi~scioosness pure when it takes the forms of pleasureable, 
* 
and forgetful objects, SOU~XIS, 
&GC., while cognizing them ? And how again is i t  in- 
finite, when it takes up that form and also gives it np ? To meet this the author says :- 
' The objects are shown to it.' 
It is so described because the objective sounds, &C., are shown to it. It might be impure 
and finite if it took the forms of the objects in the same way as does the will-to-be. It 
is in fact t'he will-to-be that takes the forms of the objects, and presents them to the 
consciousness, which follows its forms. Thence is it said that the Purusa cognizes. 
The doubt again arises, how can an object be known if ' the power of consciousness 
the author : - 
"It gaps not from object to object.." 
Going from object to object lnesils motiol~,ad the t e w h i ~ ~ g  
is that consciousness 
not Inova But then horn does it take possession of that form ? l?or this reasqn he'sajs :- 
U The power of coi~scio~isness 
changes oot.." 
The three-fold change, indicated by characteristic, differeotii and condition, does not 
exist in consciousness, that it may pot on the form of action and tlhereby change in con- 
junction with the will-to-be. 
It will be described further on how it cognizes, even though 
it moves not. 
Thtu it is esbablished that the power of consciousness is the good. It has been said 
that the manifestation of discriminatire knowledge is not the good, being as it is of the 
nature of the will-to-be. 
For this reason it is the opposite of the power of consciousness. 
When even the manifestation of discrimination also is to be given up, wh& is to be 
said of the other modificatiohs which are full of shortcomings ? 
This is the meaning. Hence 
for this reason, the discussion of the Inhibitive Trance is proper1 y ihtroduced. Therefore 
the author says :- 
U On this acaount the mind tends to tnrn from it, Be." 
The meaning is that it ohealrs 
the indulgence of discriminative t nowledge too, by t;.e Hig!ler desirelessness, which ie 
' 
the Illumin~tion of knowledge itself, 

CH. I. 
ON TRANCE (SAMADBI;, 2, 3. 
L , 
I 
Now he describes what the aspect of the mind is when all its modifications have been 
restrained : - 
In that state, &ce" That state means the state of Restraint (Nirodha). The nature 
of restraint or inhibition is'described :ob4 
It is the seedless," 
The vehicle of action@ with that of afflictions is the seed of life-state, life-period 
and life-experience. The seedless is that which has gone beyond that. 
Now the author gives another name of the same which is better known to the Yogis 
and which is descriptive of the mental state, the ultra-cognitive. 
" Nothing is cognized in that, &C." 
He summarizes :-" This is thc two-fold Yoga, the restraint of the modifications of the 
mind." 
Tadb, then, at that time, at the time of coi~centration. m: 
Drabtub, 
. . 
of 
the seer, of the soul. 
v d  Sva-rape, in his own nature, or state. m m ,  ~vaath$- 
nam, resting, standing, remaining, lying. 
3. Then the seer stands in his own nature. 
V Y ~ A .  
There being no object of cognition in that state of the mind, what 
is the state of the conscious principle (puruga) who has identified him- 
self with the cognitions of the Will-to-be ? " Then the seer stands in his 
own nature." 
At that time the power of co~~sciousness 
is established in 
its own nature, as in the state 6f perfect freedom. In the outgoing mind 
reality it is 
it appears to be not so centred ih its own uaturc, though 
the same. 
V ~ H A S P A T I ' ~  
GLOSS. 
Now says he, in order to introduce the next aphorism :- 
U There being w object of cognition in that state of the mind, &c. ' 
The word what ' 
is ilquisitive. The meaning is this. The conscious principle is always perceive j 
as the 
very self of the cognitions of the Will-to-know taking on the forms of various objects. 
He is never 
as separate from the cognitions of the Will-to-know. For this reason 
the knowledge of the will-to-be is of the Tery nature of the coi~scious principle, as light 
of the sun. And it does not exist when the mind is in a state of residual potency (saws- 
khra). And no existence can last as such when i t  has given up its nature.. 
Let it be so. But then why does not the Purusa know the Will-to-be in its state 
of residual potency ? To meet this -he says :-" There being no object of cognition, &C." 
It is not the Will-to-know alone, but the Will-to-know which has the objects of the 
Ynrnsa to achieve that is the sphere of cc.nsciousness. The objects of the ~ u r a ~ e a r
discriminative knowledge and the experience of t h e  objective world. 
These two no 
longer exist in the state of inhibition (nirodha). Therefore the non-existence of object8 
in that state is established. The author gives the answer by the 
Then the 
soer stands in his own nature." 
a 

By the word ' svarQpa ' (his own nature), the author excludes the appearances of the 
calm, the rufaed and the forgetful (the dinta, t h e  Ghora and the MRcha) which have 
been fastened upon 'ii. The nature of the P u r q a  is consciousness alone, unaffected by 
the contacts (of objects placed alongside), not the cognitive action of the Will-to-know 
appearing as calm, &c. 
This is of the nature of contacts. *It is like the redness which 
appears in a crystal pure white by nature, when a Japa flower is placed in contact 
therewith. And it is not necessary that when the things placed in contact are removed, 
the thing with which they have been placed in contact, should also disappear. That 
would mean encroachment of the one into the sphere of the other. Tho locative case 
is used, because the thing and the nature of the thing are conceived asbbeing separate, 
blthough in reality the same, and not distinct. 
The same meaning is rendered clear by the Commentator :- 
a' At that t i m e  the power of consciousness, &C." A t  that time, in the state of ree- 
traint and not in the state of outgoing. 
Let that be SO. But then the pon7er of cousciousness, not standing in its own nature 
when the Will-to-be is in the state of outgoing activity, and becornink established in that 
state when in the state of inhibition; becomes changeful. 11 it be said that i t  remains 
established in its own nature even in the state of outgoing activity, then there would 
be no difference between tlhe states of outgoing activity and inhibition. For this reason 
says the author :- 
'In the outwardly inclined mind, &C.' 
The power of consciousness, constant because standing alone, is never disturbed 
in its own nature ; and for this reason js the same inactivity as in the state of restraint, 
 he mother-of-pea~l does not for certain, put on and give up its true nature, while 
bcoming the object of tjrue or false knowledge. The hower, however, fancies it to be 
something different from what it really is. 
In relation to the Inhibitive Trance; the Cognitive Trance also is a state of ont- 
going activity. 
Sfitra 4. 
evtitti, with modifications. 
m
y
 
Sbrfiyjam, identification. 
itaratra, 
at other times, elsewhere. 
4. Identification with modifications elsewhere. . 
How then ? 
On account of objects being presented to it, identifi- 
cation with modifications takes place elsewhere. The 
(puruga) is not unaffected by whatever 1na.y be the 
ruincl in the state of outgoing activity. And so in the 
" Knowledge ia but one ; diacrirnination alone is 
conscious principle 
modifications of the 
aphbrism :- 
knowledge. 
? I 

CH. I. 
Oh7 TRANCE ( S A M ~ D H I ) ,  
4. 
11 
< 
. 
I 
The 
C mind is like a magnet energized hp nearness alone. Being 
seen it becomes the possession of its lord, the purucja. Therefore the reason 
for knowing the modifications of the mind ie the eternal relation of the 
puruga. 
~HCHASPATI'B GLOSS. 
For the purpose of introducing another aphorism, the author puts the question, ' How 
- .  
then ?' The meaning is this. In what manner does it shine then, if it is not perceived to be 
what it really is. Adding the word which explains the cause, he reads the aphorism :- 
" On account of objects being presented to it, identification with modifications takes 
p l q e  elsewhere." 
Elsewhere :-In 
the state of outward acq?ity, whatever may be the modifications of 
the mind, the calm, t h e  ruffled, and the forgetfa, the mine are the manifestations of the 
. 
oons~ious principle as he exists in that state. 
The word Sa in 8iirhpya (identification) means oneness. This is the meaning. The 
notions, I am calm.' ' I am ruffled,' I am forgetful ', appear by fastening the modifications 
of the will-to-be upon the conscious principle, by taking the will-to-know and the consciou8 
principle to be one on account of proximity. as in the case of the white crystal and the 
Japa flower. This happens in the same way as one looking his iace reflected in a dirty 
mirror, becomes anxious and thinks, ' I am dim! 
Although the fastening of t h e  conscious 
principle upon the will-to-know, is like the knowledge of sound, &C., only a manifestation 
of the will-to-know, and although this manifestation must be considered to be unintelli- 
gent, haring, as it does, its origin in the Prak~iti, showing forth as it does the will-to-know 
8s the knower, the manifestation shines forth as a manifestation of consciousness. And 
eimilarly does this dtma (self) appear to possess false knowledge, although in reality he 
has no false knowledge. He appears as the enjoyer, although he is not the enjoyer, 
He appears as possessed of discriminative knowledge, and illuminated thereby although 
devoid of it in reality. 
This will be shown further under the aphqisms :- 
46 Consciousness not moving, takes its formhnd thus the will-to-know knows itself as 
such."-22. 
4. 
~ n j q r n e n t  
(Bhogs) consists in the identification of the notions of the Objective 
Essence and tho Conscious principle (purqa), which 'are quite distinct from each 
-34.3. 
The Commentator now says that this is recognized by another school also. 
"So is the aphorism, &c," 
The aphorism "knowledge is but one; discrimination alone is knowledge," is an 
aphorism of the Achirya PaiichashikhP. 
But how is knowledge but one 1 The modifications of the will-to-be in the shape of 
the objects, sound, &C., and in the shape of discrimination, are to be considered Unintelli- 
gent. This is one knowledge. The intelligence of the Purusa is distinct from it. Its 
recognition also is knowledge. For this redson says, " Discrimination alone is knowledge." 
It is in view of the discrimination of the world possessing the characteristics of 
appearance and disappearance, that it is said 
Knowledge is but one." 
bs to consciousness, it is the nature of the Purusa, not of the discriminative faculty. 
This, however, is not within the range of the perceptive cognibion of the world. It fall6 
within the sphere of the inferential and verbal cognitions. This is the meaning. 

12 
PATANJALI'S Y OUA. 
While showing thus that nescienm is the radical cause of mental phenomena. in the 
state of outioing activity, it is also indicated that conjunction, the cause of nescienco, 
is the cause of enjoyment, and also that there exists between the two the relation of the 
owner m d  the owned. For the purpose of establishing this t h e  Commentator says, 
It becomes thu possession of its lord." 
This shows the relationship. 
But the cognizer, purnsa, can only be the lord of the mind, when it &joys the benefit 
of the service rendered by the mind. And it is not .possible that he should so enjoy 
-the service without coming into relationship with the bened t rendered ; b u t  i t  cannot be 
beneficially acted upon, and there it cannot come into relationship. If, on the otiler 
hand, t h e  enjoyment of the benefit is to be considered to be due to the conjunction thereof, 
then the purusa must be considered to be changefnl. 
For this reason he says, act by mere nearness." 
The mind is not conjoined t6 the purusa; it ia merely placed near him. The near- 
ness pt t h e  puruya is not in space, nor yet in time, on account of the absence of juxta- 
position. It is defined by fitness. The purusa possesses the power of enjoyiug as sub- 
ject, while t h e  mind possesses the power of being enjoyed. This! is m e m i  by saying 
" Being seen, the mind becomes the possession of the lord." 
The meaning is that it becomes the object of enjoyment by being transformed into 
the form of sound, &a. As to enjoyment, although it is a characteristic o? the mind, being 
as it is a modification in the form of .sound, &C., still it is spoke11 of as being a characteristih 
of the Purusa, because of his identifications, .with the modifications, on account of t h e  
obeence of tllB conception of distinctness between the mind and consciousness, 
Thus is established the enjoyment by the ??orup of the service rendered by the 
i 
mind, although he is not conjoined to it ;,as is also established the unchanging nature or 
the Puruga. 
Well then, the relation of owner m d  owned which is t h e  cause of enjoyment, has it8 
cause in nescience. But what is the cause of nescience ? There must be some cause 
for it, because no effect c m  Come into existence without some cause. As they gay, 
Wbat to him cloth make, 
Nescience manifest, 
Like dream and so forth." 
This doubt is removed by putting the answer in the form of a summary :--'& For this 
reason, &C," 
The meaning is this. The, cause of the experience of the calm, t h e  ruffled and the 
forgetful forms of mental modifications is the eternal conjunction caused by eternal nesci. 
ence ; and the relation of nescience and potentialization (vAsan$, in each being born from 
the other in eternal successioii is without a beginning like the mutual relation of seed 
-and sprout.) 
Siitra 5. 
m: Vyittayab, modifications. 
g
s
~
:
 
Panchtayyah, five fold, of five kinds. 
m: Klista, 
. . pinful. 
w&~: Aklisdb, 
. . 
not painful. 
5. The modifications are five-fold, painful and not- 
painful. 

I 
OH. I. 
ON TRAh'CE (SdMADHI), 5. 
13 
@pm I &mmmRaa~ wd&jm 
4 ' I &
j
~
~
~
~
d 
d 
I nfi&w$ 
.r 
.r 
f@m& I 8w&m:*nr~~faF;rr=tlMsai ck I * 
15-xwimTT* 
I -a' 
i$eaSa-a- 
d k $ a  
ald& 
II ( 11 
f 
V ~ Y S A .  
These then, the five-fold modific.at.ions of the mind, painful and 
not-painful, are to be restraind, being many. The painful nre tlmse that 
cause the atnictions ancl become the field for the growth of tho vehicle 
of actions (IrarlnBdsya). 
The not-painful are those that have discrimi- 
< t 
nation for their object and which oppose the fmctionirlg of the 
qua- 
lities.'' 
They remain not painful even though fallen into the stream of tlm 
painful. 
They are not-painful even in the intervals of the painful. 
The pninFul also remain in the intervals oE the not-painful. 
Potencies 
(Facnl tied of the Rfime class are generated by the modificat,ions themselves ; 
ancl the modifications are caused by the potencies. Thus 
C- the wheel of 
mental nmclifications and potencies turns round ancl round. Such is the 
mind which when its objects hare been attainefi, rests unmoving like the 
self, or d isappears. 
VACHASPATI~S GLOSS. 
Let that be. A man is taught to do what is only possible. And it is not poseible to 
restrain the mental modifications without knowing them. Fnrther, no one can count them 
oven by a thouwand lives of men. Being not counted, horn can they be restrained? 
Having this doubt he introduces the aphorism laying down the number of these modi- 
fications. 
These, the five-fold moditications of the mind, the painful and not-painful, are 
to be restrained, being many." 
Mental modifications as a class are one : real cognition 
and others are their five forms. For this reason, modifications having these ~ub-olasse~ 
are 
five-fold, haye five sub-divisions. The plaral number is properly used, because these 
modifications are many, on account of the distlinctions due to different persanalitieg, - 
such as thoso of Chaitra and Maitra and others. The meaning is that whoever i t  may be, 
whether Chaitrs, Maitra or any other, the mental modifications of them all are five-fold 
and no more. The use of the singular number of the word ' mind ' is for the purpose of 
denoting the class only. It should be understood t o  mean the minds. 
Now t h e  author mentions a minor classification of the same, as that is useful for the 
purpose of practice. " Painful and not-painful." 
The object is that the painful are to be 
restrained by the help of the not-painful, and these too by the higher desirelessness. 
The painful are those, Cc." 
This explains them. 
The afflictions of egoism, &C., are the causes of certain mental modifications. The modi- 
fications of which the afflictions are the moving causes are spoken of as such, i.e., painful. 
Or to put it another way. Of the Prakriti, which works for the achievement of (the objects 
of) the Purusa, the tnanifestations of the rajas and the tamas are only the causes of the 
afflictions, and they alone therefore tend towards misery. Affiiction being painful, the 
painful are those in which this affliction, the rajas and tamas manifestation, exists. Jn- 
asmuch as they come into manifestation for the purpose of supplying the affiictions only, 
they are for this very reason, the field for the growth of the vehicle of actions. The 
meaning is that t h e  Puruga having become con~cious of the object which is at hand by 

PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
means of the manifestation of real cognition, &C, becomes attached to them, or is repelled 
from them, and thus makes the vehicle of actions grow. Those become the Bainful mani- 
festations which are fertile grounds for t h e  growth of virtue and vice. 
He describes the not-painful :-" The not-painful are those, BC." niscrimination is 
the illumination of the cognition of t h e  Objective Essence of the Wilt-to-be, when it flows 
undisturbed. By speaking of it as an object, he suggests the knowledge of the distinction 
between the Objective essence and the Purup, which is the object thereof. 
And because they have for their object t h e  knowledge of the distinction between 
the Objective Essence and tho Purusa, they are for this very reason the opposers of 
the functionings of the qualities. The function of the qualities is the initiation of the 
effects. This ceases with discriminative knowledge. Thus the object of the functioning 
of the qualities having been fulfilled, they are said to oppose their functioning, 
this 
reason these mental moflifica tions of Real Cognition, &C., are not-painf al 
Let that be. No one is born who has no desires. The mental modifications .of all 
living beings are therefore painful. And it is not proper that not-painful modifications 
should exist in tho midst of the stream of the painful modifications. Nor having fallen 
ill tile midst of opposing forces, can they be fit to perform any work, even though tpey 
do exist. Hence to say that the painful are restrained by the nongainful and the non. 
painful by the higher desirolessness, is only a wish. -Hence tho notlior says :- 
" Fallen into the stream of the painful too they are the non-painful." 
I 
Practice and desirelessness horn by the study of the Veda, indtlction 
- 
and precept 
remain themselves the non-pail$& 
even though fallen into the stream of the painful. A 
Br&hmana living in the viilagb of SMla which is full of the Kiriitns, does not become 8 Kirfita, 
* 
The words L' in the intervals of tbe non-painful" propound an analogy. Because 
they take their place in the intervals of the painful modifications, the non-painful ones, 
not suppressed by the painful, gathering strength in due course by hal~ituation suppress 
the painful ones themselves. 
This is what the author says :--"Similar potencies nre 
oreated by modifications, &C." 
The meaning is that by the non-painful modifications the 
non-pninfol potencies are generated. This is the wheel of mental modiflcations and 
+ 
potencies which always turns round and round, up to the ultra-cognitive Trance. 
Such then is the mind, which in the state of suppression remains only in the state 
of residual potency and thus stands like the self ; and it is said by way of an optional 
mode of expression that it disappears. The final meaning of the aphorism is summarized :- 
" These painf 111 and non-painfnl manifestations are of five descriptions." 
The words, 
Five descriptions" give only the sense ; they do not give the connotation of the word 
because the suffix " tayap " has never been used to connote description. 
SQtras 6 and 7. 
mm Pramb~a, real cognition, right knowledge. M Viparyaya, unreal 
cognition, indiscrimination. h 
Vikalpa, imagination, verbal delusion. fig 
~ i - d r ~ ,  
deep sleep. 7: 
Smyitayah, and memory. 
I 
mm Pratyaksa, direct perception. q m  Anurnbna, inference. WT: aga- 
m& and verbal cognition, competent evidence. mf Prsmbpitni, kinds of real 
cognition, (or proof S j . 

6. 
Real Cognition, Unreal Cognition, Imagination, 
Deep Sleep and Memory. 
7. Percey tion, Verbal Cognition and Inference are 
real. cogni tions. 
vrtisa. 
These painful and non-painful modifications are of five descrip- 
tions : -Real 
Cognition, Unreal Cognition, Imagination, Sleep and Nemory. 
The Real Clogni tions are Perception or sense-cognition ; Inference or 
Sequential Cognition and Verbal Cognition. 
Perception is tile merltal inodification which cognizes chiefly the 
~pecific appearance of an object, 'being of the nature of both the generic 
and the specific qualities, and which has it for its object, by means of tl~e 
impression caused t,herein b y  the external object though the passage of 
the senses. The result is the knowledge of the modifications of the 
mind by the P u r u p ,  as if they were not all distinguishable from himself. 
We shall establish further on that the Purusa knows by reflex conjunc- 
tion with the will-to-be. 
Inference or Sequential Cognition is the mental inodificition which 
cognizes the generic nature chiefly and has for its sphere the relation 
which exists in objects of the same class wit11 that which is inferred, but 
does not exist as sucll in objects of different classes. For example,, the . 
llloon and the stars are moving objects, because they go from one place to 
anotaher like Chai tra. 
And the VindhyB, mountain does not move, 
because it is not seen going from one place to another. 
An object perceived or inferred by a competent man is described by 
llim in words with. the intention of transferring his knowledge to anotller, 
The mental modification which has for its sphere the meaning of worde 
is the Verbal Cognition to the hearer. 
When the speaker has neither 
perceived nor inferred the object, and speaks of things which cannot 

PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
be believed, the authority of Verbal Cognition fails. 
But it does not fail 
in the original speaker with refeiwm to either the object of perception 
or of inference. 
VBCHASPATI*~ 
GLOSS. 
The author mentions them by their names, Real Cognition, Unreal Cognition, Imagi- 
nation, Sleep and Memory." In er~umerotion the different parts arc understood separalel y as 
they are spoken of; and this is n copulative composition in which each word i s  joined 
to the other in the sense of the word 
Cha' (and) which means the joining of the one 
to the other. 
AB ill the aphorism : -- 
''Nescience is the taking of the non-eternal, the impare, the painful and the not-self 
to be the eternal, tile pure, the pleasurable and the self."--6. 2. 
The definition does not comprehend such confused mal~ifestatio~~s 
of consciolw- 
ness, as-the forgetfullless of directions and the unbroken circle f'orniecl by a fast-molTing 
point of light; so even here notwithstanding that the modifications of Real Cognition, &c-, 
are mentioned, the doubt may arise, that t h e r e  are other modifications, Besides those 
named, in existence. lror the removal of this doubt, i t  was necessary to say Five-fold ? 
It is thereby shown that there are so many modifications and no morea96. 
Going to divide the modification of Real Cognition, he gives the general descrip 
tion of the subheac@. " The Real Cogllitions are Perception, Inference and Rd.xd 
Cognitions." 
Right Knowledge consists in the ~~uknown 
truth, which becomes the cause of the 
aotsl'e setting about to act. The mcans of obtaiuing that knowledge is the Real Cognition 
(the cognizing of the real). The mention of the division is for the purpose of <refuting a 
larger or smaller number of sub-heads. 
Out of these the definition of Perception ia first given, because that is a t  the root of 
all other means of @owledge. 
Perception is, &c. 
By using the words, &'of an object" the quality of being merely fastened upon (that 
is, existing as an idea alone) is denied. 
i 
By using the words, ' which has it for its object ' it is denied that the externality of 
the object is the sphere of the mental idea thereof. By usiug the words, by means of the 
impression therein caused by the external object,' the relation of the idea in the mind 
to the external object of knowledge is shown. 
He gives the cause of tbe.im11ression thereof, even though there be distance between 
(the knower and the thing known). 
" Through the passage of the senses." 
Some say an object is t h e  generic quality alone. Others say, an object is the 
specific quality alone. 
Other thinkers again say that an object is possessed of both 
descriptions of qualities, the generic and the specific. For their refutation, he s a p  :-- 
"Being of the nature of both the generic and the specific qualities." 
An object is 
not possessed of the generic and the specific qualities ; it is of the very nature thereof. 
This will be shown when the question of simultaneous non-cognition is discussed. 
Now he distingilislies the domain of sequential and rerbal cognitioils from that of per- 
ception :-' which cognizes chiefly the specific appearance of an object.' 
The meaning 
ie that although in perception, the generic quality also shines out, still it is subordi- 
note to the specific quality. This is only suggestive of direct1knowledge-Discrimi- 
d i v e  knowledge also is suggested, therefore. 
Be refutes the contradiction of the result of perceptive cognition. 

cn. I. 
' The result is the knowledge by the Purusa of the modifications of the mind.' 
The question is, Bow can knowledge by the Purusa be the result of a modification 
of the mind ? If an axe operate upon a Khadira tree, it is not a Plakp tree that is cut 
Ihe~eby. 
For this reason he sags, ' a s  if they were n c t  at all distinguishable from himself! It is 
not the cognitive modihtion of the mind that takes its place in t h e  Purup; it is on 
the contrary consciousness reflected in the mirror of the mill-to-how, that appears in the 
form of the modification of t h e  objec6, because the modifieahion of the will-to-know takes 
the form of the object. 
This is t h e  resolt of t h e  act of perception, This consciousne~8 
thus reflected in t h e  will-io-know is not separate from the will-to-know (Buddhi). It 
is of its very nature, and the modification thereof in t h e  shape of an object is also of 
the nature of the will-to know. They CO-exist in the same place. It is, theyefore, proper 
that this should be the result of the perceptive cognibion. This we shall show. 
For this reason the author says :-" The p u m p  knows by refiex conjuncl.ion with the 
- 
will -to-know." 
Because Verbal Cognition has its origin in t h e  recognition of t h e  relations es- 
tablished by the inferences of t h e  Intellect of the hearer, on account of the appearance 
therein of tlio signs of CO-existence, etc., in sequence of perceptive knowledge, it is by 
inference that verbal knowledge becomzs possible. 
For this reason and also because 
inferred knowlodge is imparted t.hereafter by means of verbal cognition, the commentator 
gives the definition of inference before that of verbal cognition. 
Inference or Sequential Cognition, &C." 
The iuferrcd object is the object possessed of the characteristic desired to be known. 
Objects of the 'sa~ne class therewith are those similar objects which are placed-into the 
same species on account of the possession of t h e  same generic quality, which is the 
characteristfa to be proved. By saying that it exists in objects of the same class mith 
that which is inferred, thb author does atvay with the presence of contrary and uncom- 
mon qualities in the aotecedent. Objects of different classes are those which fall not 
within the same species. These are others than those which fall into the same class, 
are their contmries and mean their non-existence. By saying that bhey do not exist as 
such icr objects of different classes, tho author emphasizes the neceesity of the possessio~ 
of t h e  generic qualities. Relation is that which furnishes the common bond. This 
called the li~aga, the sign which is t h e  common bond, the generic qnality. By this he shorn 
the characteristic nature of the thing t 9  be proved (pakp, sldhya) and thw, doer 
away with non-probability . 
' Has for its object,' (tadvipya) means that to which it is bound, as the word 
&t,~ga (object) is derived from the root Shi, to bind. 
The author  peaks of cognizing the generic nature, with the object of distinguishing 
it from the perceptive cognition. The sphere of inference is limited to thegenerie quality 
because it is dependent for its birth upon the cognition of relationj and in specific objects 
there can be no cognition of relationship ; ancl for this reason the common quality alone 
&*its of the recognition of relationship. He gives an esample :-U 
For example." 
The 
word and ' (cha) denotes a cause. Because the Vindhya is not a moving object, i t  does 
not change its location. Therefore when motion is removed, change of place disappeare. 
Hence there being change of place, the moon and the stars are moving bodies ; as is 
Chaitra. This is proved. 
He gives the deflnition of the mental modification of Verbal Cognition :-" An object 
porcoived or inferred by a competent person, &C." 
A competent person is an &a. 
Competence (apti) which radically 
" reach,'' 
means an nl l-round comprehension, or the constant prosenco along with each other of tbe 
8 
l 

18 
PATANJAW'S YOGA. 
knowledge of the realities, mercifulness and t h e  skiIt:?lness in their acts of the instruments 
of knowledge. An f pto or a competent or an authoritative *erson is one who is possessed 
of this.. An object seen or inferred by him is the object of verbal cognition. The h o w -  
ledge obtained by an authorita t h e  person such as above described, by hearing is not 
mentioned here, because knowledge obtained through words has inferential and perceptive 
knowledge for its root, and therefore must be considered as having been mentioned by the 
mention of the two only. 
Transferring of his knowledge" consists in the production of knowledge in the mind 
of the hearer similar tothe knowledge which exists in the mind of the authoritative 
person. For that object it is uttered in words, i.e., is made known for causing gain to, and 
removing the disadvantages of the hearer. The rest is easy. 
When the speaker speaks of things which cannot be believed :-such 
as, ' it is the 
ten pomegranates themselves which will become the six cakes.' 
Has neither perceived nor inferred' :-Such as one who says, Let him who desirea 
heaven, worship the village tree (Chaitya might mean the Buddha, the temple, &C., besides). 
Such an authority fails. 
The question arises that if it be so, the teaching of Menu, &c,, also fails because 
they $00 speak of things not seen or inferred. 
Inasmuch as they my, whatever of the dbarrna of whomsoever is disclosed by Manu, 
all that is laid down in the Veda,' he was certainly possessed of all knowledge. 
Por this reason he says : --" When it has been perceived by the original speaker, &C." 
 he original speaker is in such teachings, of course, iihwara. 
SBtra 8. 
M: Viparyayab, unreal congnition. 
MithyL, of the unreal. -- m 
Jnbnam, knowing, W A tar!, not i t ~  
own. m Hfipa, form. a h ,  Pratistham, 
occupying, standing, poseessing. 
8. 
Unreal Cognition is the knowing of the unreal 3 
possessing a form not its own. 
not its own. Why is it not the knowing of the real ? Because the know- 
ledge of the real remows it, i~lam~uch 
as Real Cognition has for its 
object a thing as it exists. Therein is seen the removal of the wrong 
knowledge by the right one ; as for example, the visual knowledge of two 
moons is removed by the perception which has for its ebJect the thing as 
it really exists, the oue moon. 

CH. I. 
ON TRANCE (SAMADRI), 8. 
19 
--- 
I 
This it is that is the five-fold Nescienee. 
A s  it is said : -Nescience, 
Egoism, Attachment, Aversion, and Love of life are the five afflictions, 
-3,. 
2. The same are technically called respec t i d y ,  darkness (tarnas), 
- 
foiget fulness (moha), extreme forgetfulness (mahbmoha), Excessive dark- 
ness (tbmisra) and blind clarlrness (andhatbmisra). 
These will he described in the context of the impurities of the mind. 
V~~CEIASPILTI~S 
GLOSS. 
Unreal cognition is the knowing of the unreal, possessed of a form not its own. 
Unreal congnition :-This 
is a statement of the thing to be defined. The knowing of 
the unreal, &C., is the definition. It means that it has a form which shines out am if i t  
were real knowledge. 
The words, ' possessed of a form not its own,' are equivalent to ' not possessed of 
the for& which is its own.' 
As for example, t h e  words, eating what is not dedicated to 
the Pitris,' mean ' not eating what is dedicated to the Pit~is.' 
Doubt also is included in this. There is, however, this much differen~e. In thfe, 
the unstability of the form of the notion exists in the notion itself, whereas in the case of 
the perception of two moons, &C., the unstability is brought home by the notion of the 
removal thereof. 
I 
The question arises that' if it be SO, then on consideration, unreal cognition show 
itself in imagination also, because there also, the real object is not perceived as such. 
Por this reason says, it is " the knowing of the unreal." 
This means that this cognition 
is contradicted by the comrnbn knowledge of all mankind. This contradiction exists in 
the ease of unreal cognition, but not in the case of Imagination. Forms of cognition due ' 
to Imagination are in common use with mankind, and it is only to those who show the apr- 
cities of s learned man and think thereupon that the knowledge of contradiotion appeah 
'. 
in this case. 
Thus the question is raised, ' why is not that real cognition ?' 
The meaning is that 
the former knowledgo is not the one that is removed by the opposite knowledge acquired 
thereafter ; but that it is the knowledge acquired thereafter that is removed by the former, 
which has been acquired before and nothing contrary to which haa appeared. 
Refutes :-' Because it is removed by right knowledge. 
It might bo real cognition'if t6e birth of the latter depended upon the former. Here, 
however, eithe; cognition is given birth to by its own cause, and is not dependent upon 
. 
tho other knowledge. The latter hao wledge thus does not take its rise by the destruc- 
tion of the former and its appearance and therefore, does not consist in the removal of the 
former. Nor does the appearance of the former knowledge mean tbe removal of the 
latter,-because this does not exist at that time. For this reason, the cause of the et& 
snoe of removability is tho absence of the close appearance of contrariety: &d the 
oaum of the power to remove is the close appearanue of contrariety. Therefore, that 
which is not right knowledge, is removed by right knowledge, inasmuch as the latter 
has for its object, somothing which exists as such. 
He gives an example :-' Therein is seen the removal of the wrong knowledge by the 
rlght one.' 
He ~ h o w s  
the evil nature of thie unreal cognition for the purpose of removal :-' Thia 
16 18 that is the five-fold Nescience.' The meaning is that ' Nescience is the generio quality 
of all the five, Nescience, Egoism, &c*' The mistaking of the Unmanifested (Avyakta), the 
Mmlfeeted objective existence (Mahat), the Principle of Individuality (Aha~kPra), and\\ 
the five gtom-bpildeni (Tqnrg8tras)-tbe 
eight . forms of $40 not-eelf, for tbe self, ie 

, 
20 
PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
4 
nescienoe, darkness (tarnas). Similarly, the mistaking by the Yogis of the eight attain- 
ments of Anirn.6, &C., which are insuspicioug, for the auspicious, is the eight-fold for- 
getfulness (mohs) which comes after the former. And this is called Egoism (asmit8). 
Similarly the idea, 'I shall enjoy sound, &C., the tlen enjnyments both as seen and 
heard, when I have acquired by Yoga the oight attaiuments of Al~irnii, &C., and hove there- 
by become r powerful man (siddha),' is the greater forgetfulness, attachment (Rgiga). 
Similarly, when led by such a judgment3, one sets about to obtain these enjoymo~~tu, 
but finds that the attainments of A+&, 
BC., are not born on account of obstacles caused 
by some one and that the enjoyment of the pleasures of both kinds, seen or heard about 
traditionally, which depend upon the attainments, is not thus obtained, anger against 
tie cause of obstacles appears. This is aversion (dvep), called utter darkness. 
Siruilasly, when the powers of A~irnt, &C., 
hare been attained, and the visible and 
heard-of objects of e n j o p ~ e ~ ~ t  
,have been obtained, then the fear that in the end of the 
Kalps all this will be destroyed, is the love of aentienb life, blind darkness (andhatiimisra 
or abhinivega). 
This has been said :- 
U Eight-fold is the division o l  darkness and so of forgetfulness ; ten-fold of the 
greater torgetfalnesa. Utter darkness is eighteen-fold and so also is blind darkness. * ? 
S ~ t r a  
g. 
m dabda, by verbal expression. sn Jnans, by knowledge. 
l a p 3  Anup&& 
followed in sequence. 
Vastu, reality, an objecti ve, substratum. F: 
suny sb, 
devoid of. 
~ R Q :  
Vikdpab, haginat ion. 
\ 
9. Imagination is followed in sequence by verbal 
expression and knowledge, and i s  devoid of obj ective 
substratum. 
Tmagination is followed in .sequence by verbal knowledge and ex- 
pression, a d  i s  devoid of objective substratum. This does not reach 
up to real cognition. Nor does it reach up to unreal cognition. Even 
in the absence of an objective sttbstratum, its action is found to be depend- 
ent upon the power of verbal expression and-knowledge. 
As for example :-' Puraga is of the nature of col~sciousness.' Now 
what is here predicsted of what ? seeing that P~~rusa 
is consciousness 
b 

4 
itself, and that there must always be a statement of the relationsl~ip of 
otle to itnother in predication ; as in the I;brase Chitra's cow. 
Similarly, " t l ~ e  purusa is inactive and the characteristics of an 
object are denied to it." 
" Rfina stands, will stand, has stood." 
Tile meaning of the root alone 
is understood by (the act of) the cessation of motion. 
Sim ilad in the sen term:, 
" The purusa has th.e characteristics 
of not being born," the mere absence of the clmracteristic of not being 
born is to be unders'tood, and not any positive cl~sracteristic possessed by 
the purosa.. That characteristic l l t ~  therefore, been imagined and ha0 
come into practical usage. 
VACEIASPATI~S GLOSS. 
" Jmagination is followed in sequence by verbal expression and knowledge, and ir ;
devoid of an objective substratum." 
If it is followed in sequence by verbal knowledge 
and expression, why should not Imaginlrtion (vikalpa) fa11 under t49 heading of Real 
Cognition ? Iff, on the other hand, it is devoid of objective substratum, it must be the 
same as unreal cognition. For this reason, says :--'This 
doe8 not reach up to Red 
Cognition.' 
Whjl does it not reach up to real cognition ? 'Because, in the absence of au 
objective substratuq &C.' 
This shows why it does not fall under the head of -1 
cognition. ' Its action is found to bo dependent upon the power of verbal expression 
and knowledge.' 
This shows that it does not fall under the head of Unreal Cognition. 
This is the meaning. 
There being no differences in some particulars, it8 differu 
in others; while showing some points of similarity. There being no objective 
substratum for either the distinction or the absence thereof, imagination showe an 
wreal image of the snbstmtnm ; and it is not, therefore, ' an act of real cognition. NO? 
is it Unreal Cognition, because it differs from it, in being recognised as such in practice. 
Now gives illi~st~ations 
taken from the sacred writings. ' As for example,' &C., which 
is the subject to be qualifiek ? \That is it predicated by ? The quality and the thing 
qualified canmt come into relatior~ship if they are not distinct from each other. The cow 
munot be predicated of a cow ; it can only be predicated of something different fmm 
itself, say Chaitra. 
This ia what he says :--There must always be the staternel~t of relationship of one 
to another in predication.' ' Predication is the relation between the predicate and the 
predicated.' In obher words, it ia the rclakiol~ between the quality and the thing qualified. 
I t  is of tlais that the statement of s seirtence consists ; as in the sentence, ' This is 
Chaitra's cow.' 
Adds another illustra Lion from the sacred writings too :--" 
Similarly." 
He. to whom the characteristics of an object (i. C., the essential force which informs 
earth, &a.) are denied is spoken of as such. Who is he ? The inactive Purap. There 
ie of courso no such characteristic of an object in the SBhkhya teaching as non-enieteace, 
by which the Yurusa may be qualified. 
The reading in some places is, " The cha~acteristics of an obj jective substratum am 
denied." 
This means as follows : -' Are denied,' means ' are pervaded by denial,' 
Le., 
they are possessed of the quality of being denied. Or io other words, it means tbat the 
characteristics of an object are possessed of the quality of Being denie!. 
But the char- 
wbristica of an object are not possessed of the q~~alit~y 
of the non-esistence of eomething. 

22 
PA TA h7JA LI'S Y OQA. 
because thew can be no relation between existence and non-existence. 
They are, how- 
ever, taken as such (i.e., cxisti:~g). 
Gives illustrations from the idiom of t h e  world :--" BPna stands." As in the sentences, 
'He cooks,' ' He breaks,' the whole series of the motnents of action in which some are 
antecedent and others snbsequent, is recognized as being qualified by one effect, so also 
in the sentence ' Hc stands,' the commentator mentions the same state of antecodence and 
postcedence :-' Will stand, has stood.' 
Well, suppose that the action of cessation of motion consists in antecedent and post- 
cedent moments jusl like the action of cooking, and that being different from Bane it 
may be predicatqd of him. For this reason, says :-' The meaning of the root itself is 
understood by the act of cessation of motion.' 
The cessation of motion itself is imaghed 
to be the characteristic of an object. Then this fancied characteristic is imagined to 
be a form of positive existence and even there is fancied an order of the precedence 
and postcedence. Such is the series of astonishing failcifl~l conceptions. Non-existence 
is imagined to be existence, and then it is imagined that it comes after something in 
succession. This fanciful conception is found in all men. I t  is not, however, a charac- 
teristic different from the Parusa, so that it might be predicated of him. 
Gives another illustration:-' 
The Purusa has the characteristic of ]lot being 
1 
born.' 
' 
Many a thinker has held that the modification of imagination is not different 
from real and unreal coguitions. The detail of these illustrations is meant to explain 
the matter to them. 
Sdtra 10. 
m m  hbhlva, of non-existence, of voidness, 
m99 Pratgaya, the cauee, the 
feeling. nom Alambanb, substratum m
~
q
 
Le., having for its substrstum,'or 
e q p r t .  &: Vrittib, modification. f~ Nidrb, deep sleep. 
10. Sleep is the mental modification which has for 
" Sleep is the mental modification which has for its objective sub- 
stratum the cause of 'non-existence." 
And this is a particular kind of 
notion, because it is called back on awakening. How ? ' I have slept 
My mind is clear ; it renders my intellect bright,' ' I have slept 
badly ; my mind is listless ; it wandel:., and is II nsteady. ' ' I l w e  slept 
with great stupidity ; my limbs are heavy ; my w i l d  is. tired ; it stands 
as it were lazy and absent.' This calling bac li wot~ld certainly not exist 

OH. I. 
ON TRANCE (SAMADRI), 10. 
23 
I 
on awakening, it there mere no recognition of the canse : and there 
would not be memories dependentl thereupon and having that for their 
4 
object. Therefore sleep is a particular kind of notion, and further it is 
to be checked in trance like any other modification.--10. 
V ~ C H A S P A T I * ~  
GLOSS. 
The word vritti ' is the subject of discussion and is, therefore, understood by context. 
A s  there is no difference of opinion among rival thinkers as to Real Cognition, Unreal 
Cognition, Imagination aud Memory being meutal modifications, the word is not used in 
those placcs separately for emphasizing the distinction. In the case of sleep, however, 
there is difference of opinion. It has, therefore, to be specially stated that it is a modi- 
fication of the mind. The understanding by context would wot serve to emphasize the 
teaching. Therefore the word modification is repeated a. second time. 
The non-existence spolen of is of the modifications of the wal-iig and drearuing 
states. The cause (pratyaya) thereof is the darkness (the quality of inertia) which 
covers the light of the intellect (the budclhi, the will-to-know). The mental modification, 
of which this becomes the substratum (that is the object), is spok%~ of nu sleep. The 
substance of the will-to-be k i n g  possessed of the three qualities, whenever illertia 
appears and overpowers the qualities of essence and disturbing Energy and thus throws 
a veil over i l l  the means of knowledge, then the w i l l - t o - k m ~  does not put on the shape of 
the object of  nowl ledge, and the purnsa, being consciolls for the time of the overpowering 
darkness of inertia alone; is said to be sleeping well with consciousness turned inwards. 
Why then this non-existence of t h e  modifications should not bo the modification of 
sleep ? Why should i t  not be similar to the states of restraint and perfect freedom 
(koivalya) ? For t.his reason, says :- 
U And tllat is a particular notion, because it is callcd back on awakening." 
Calling back' is the remembrance thereof with all its adjuncts. How? n7hen the 
Tamas appears aloog with the Sattva, the reflection of one who has awakened after sleep, 
is like thjs:-'I 
have slept well; my mind is c~ca'r and mkes my intellect brjght.p 
Bright means pure. 
IVhen the Tamas appears along with the Rajas, the reflection is similar to what is 
expressed by- 
' I have slept painfully ; my m i d  is unfit for WOF~.' \Thy ? Because i t  wanders, 
it is unsteacly. 
Then speaks of the reflection of one who awakes after a sleep, in which the Tamas 
appears, having to its utmost overpowrred the Sattva and the R,ajas :- 
' I have slept very stupidly ; m y  limbs are heavy ; my ruilld' is tired, lazy and as it 
were absent.' 
The fact to be proved having been established by the callon of difference, now 
applies the sanle canon of difference to the canse thereof. 
' Depeudent thereupon means caused by the recognition. ' 
' Haring that for their object,' means ' having the cause of t'he noll-existence of the 
modifications for their object .' 
The cause is recognized in this way, ' This is it.' 
And it is recognized by him who 
LP., just on awakening. The meaning 
is that at the t i m e  of awakening, the knowledge of the notion exists along with the 
knowledge of the cause of the non-existence of the modiflc a t* 
ions. 
The question arises : The modifications of Real Cognition, &C., 
show themselves 
in an outwardly inclined mind ; they are, therefore, to be checked, being contrary to 

24 
PATANJA LI'S YOGA. 
trance. Sleep, however, is similar to the modification cif onepointedness ; wby then'shodd 
it be contrary to trance ? 
For this reason, says :- 
'And further it is to be checked in trance like any other modification.' The 
meaning is that although it is similar to the modification of one-pointedi~ess, yet it is 
caused by Tamas, and is, themfore, contrary to both the Cognitive and the ultra-cognitive 
trances. 
The meaning is that that too is to be checked. 
Anubhilta, the objective mental, perceived. 
h w  Vigaya, impressions, 
subjects. m: 
Asamprarnosa)), not stealing sway along, not slipping away. 
TqfA: Smritib, memory. 
11. Memory 
C is the not stealing away along with objec- 
five mental impressions (retained) (i. e., the reproducing of 
not more than what has been impressed upon the mind). 
c 
qqi?$kn:qq?rw 9 1 i r m - % a m m m *  
I *m 
, ~ q :  
geq:&r~.fEr4i1: 
D swg:ai&mq @$Q &m: 
I 
m I 
g:xmi~r a: 
I 
~
i
t
r
r
;
:
 3q~Wh 
I m: aa\ mar mG: I sm~i 
W 
Gtmmalar&- 
-. 
%h 
it 91 Ir 
VYBSA. 
Does the mind remember the act of knowing or tLe object? The 
notion coloured by the object of knowledge sl~oms out both the object 
and the act of linorviedg.e, 
C- 
a~ld tlms begins the formation of the habit 
of the same kind. 
The habit nlad'ests its own cause, aild thus generates 
a memory, having the same f o m  and consisting of 110th the object and 
the act of ].;nowledge. 
When the manifestation of the act 
knowledge 
is the first of the two, the ~nodification is the intellect (budclhi). Whell 
the appearance of the object of knowledge is the tirst, it is Memory. 
This memay is two-fold : When tile plier,omer~n~l 
to be remenlbw 
ed llas become the vary nature of the mind, and when it has not so 
become. 
In dream it is the forme: ; at the time of waking the latter. 
811 these melnories are born ill sequence of the impressioi~s of lleal 
Cognition, U:! real Cogui tion, Imagination, Sleep and Memory. 
Further, 

CH. 1. 
ON TRANCE (SAMADRI), 
ance of thp, quality i s  established. 
Memory is described to be that in mhich the form of the object of knowledge is the 
first or fore~uost rrppearanoe. By the form of tlie object of knowledge being the first in 
appearance, it is meant that the cbject 
of 
kuowledge has already been subjected 
to the operation of the other mental modifications. It ie said the field ol memory 
4 
all these modifications are of the nature of pleasure, pain and illusion. 
Pleasure, pain and illusion will be described among the aEAictions. 
1 Attacliniel~t is the sticking to pleasure as such iu sequence.'--7. 
2. 
1 Aversion is the sticlting to pain as srlcil in sequence.'S.-2. 
Illusion, 
however, is Nescience. 
All these modifications are to be checked. It is 
when. these have been checlred that there comes ei tlwr the Cognitive or 
the ultra-cogni tive trance. 
VBCHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Memory is the not stealing away along with montal impressions." 
Memory is the 
. 
not stealing away along with an object which has come into the mind by real cognition, 
&C. 
It is only the object of knowledge which comes into conscioosness by mental habit 
alone and which shines forth into the mind ill consequence of the cognition of t h e  cause 
of t h e  habit, that is one's own. The taking of an object, however, over and above that 
is theft, on account of its similarity with the act. The word ' pramosha ' is derived from 
the root ' mush,' to steal. 
This is the meaning ; Right cognition and others all cause the knowledge of an 
object unknown, either in the ordinary or in some particular way.-- Memory, howaver, 
does not pass over the limitation of the former knuwledgo. 
It is that formor knowledge 
or something less than that which is its object, never something more. 
This is the dis- 
tiuction of memory from other modifications. 
The question, Does it remember the no- 
tion or the object ?' starts this discussion. 
, 
It would appear that the habit generated by an act of knowledge puts into the mind 
the object of knowledge only, because the impression in the mind is caused by the 
coming in of the object of knowledge : and no mental impression can come into existence - 
- 
of itself. If the mental impression9 itself were reproduced, it wonld be the mental 
impression alone (and not the object of knowledge). 
Por this reason the author coues to fhe final coi~clusion that it is a remembrance of 
both. Because the mental irnpressio n (the act of knowledge) takes ibs origin from the, 
object of knowledgo, the former is colour%l by fhe latter. In reality, however, it 
manifests, i.e., illuminatns the form, that is the appearance of bobh the object and the 
act of knowledge. 
That which brings anythillg into rnanife:tstim, 
is its cause (vyaiijaka, manifester). 
Its plenifestation is the form thereof* Hence the meaning of the original is, ' possessing 
the form of its oalise.' 
The question arises, what is the d%erence between the memory and the intellect 
(buddhi), if they have t h e  same form as far as their genesis is cowerned ? 
For this reason, the author says :-U 
When tha form of the act of knowled* 
is the 
first of the two, Be." 
An acc of knowledge consists in the taking in of an object ; and it is not possible 
that there should be the taking inof an object which has already been taken in, i.e., known. 
Hence by this is described the knowing of the yet unknown, which is iutsllection. It is 
describecl to be such as the form or appearance of kliowledge is the first, i.e., the most 
important factor therein. And although there is no di9erence in nature, the preponder- 

comprises the mental impressions which have already been subject& to the opemtion 
of other mental modifications. And this is what is " not stealing along with mental 
impressions." 
But this stealing exists in memory too. It showe in dream past phenomena impressed 
upon the mind a t  different times and places, such as the names, Le., as connected with , 
other times and places which have not passed 
I 
into the mind as such. For this reason, 
he says, ' It is two-fold.' 
' That which has become of the very nature of mind,' means raised into being by 
mental potency, imagined. This is that in which the object of memory has already been 
made part of the mind. 
The other is tnat which has not become of the nature of the mind, which is not 
raised out of mental potencies, is not imagined and is therefore real. 
This is not memory, it is on the contrary unreal cognition, fitting in as it does 
with the definition thereof. It is called memory because it only looks like it, just as what 
looks like real cognition is called real cognition. 
% 
But then why is memory mentioned last of all ? 
The reason is given :- All these memories, &C.' 
LXmpression in sequence' means 
taking in. M~mory is a modification preceded by this taking in. That is to say, t h e  
genesis of memory is therefrom. 
The question arises that an intelligent m m  will only check the modifications which 
cnnse misery to the Purup, and such are the afiictions, not the mcdifications as such. 
What then is the object of their suppression ? For this reason, he says :-All 
these, &c. 
This is easy. 
SQtra 12. 
mmI, Abhybsa, by practice. .-, 
Vairiigy&bhy&m, by desirelessness, 
unattachment. q, Tsd, their. m:, 
Nirodhab, restraint, control. 
12. They are restrained by 
h, 
practice and desireless- 
Well then, what is the means for restraining them ? " They are 
.I 
restrained by prac tic6 and desirelessness. " 
The stream of mind flows both ways ; flows towmds good and it 
flows towards evil. 
That which flows on to perfect 'independence 
(kaivalya) down the plane of discrirnirktivs knowledge, is named the 
strearn of happiness. That which leads to re-birth and flows down the 
i 
plane of undiscriminative ignorance, is the strearn of sin. 

Among these the flow of the desirables is thinned by desirelessness ; 
the flow of discrimination is rendered visible by habituating the mind to 
the experience of knowledge. 
Hence suppression of the mental modification is dependent upon both. 
a 
V~?HASPATI'B 
GLOW. 
The Commentator asks the means of restraint. " Well then, what, &C." 
He amwers 
by the aphorism :--L 
They are 'erestrained by practice and desirelessness.' The operation 
of practice and desirelessness on the manifestation of restraint ie collective, on account 
of each operating as a branch of the other. They ate not optional. For this reason he 
says :-' The stream of mind Bows both ways, &C." 
Blows towards' : The word prfigbhfirfi in the original means bank, .limitation ; and 
the idea is that the stream is so banked, i.e., limited in its flow as to reach the state of 
perfect independence (kaivalya). 
Down the plane :" The word nimna' in the original means down, an inclination 
of the ground, such as makes it possible for waber 60 flow in a particular direction. It 
also means depth, into which water would always Bow. 
m, Tatra, of 
these, there. M, 
Sthitau, as regards the steadiness, 
as regards keeping them perfectly restrained. m:, Yatnab, the effort, con- 
tinuoue etruggb. -: 
Abhyiisah, (is) what is called practice. 
13. Of these, practice is the effort to secure 
VY ASA. 
. Steadiness is the undisturbed calmiless of the flow of the mind, 
jvllen it has become free from the modifications. 
Effort to secure that end is the putting out of energy to Becure, and 
towards t1bat. 
Practice is the resort to the means thereof with the object of attain- 
ing it. 
V&HASPATI'S 
GLOSS. 
Of these, the author describes pratice by stating its nature and object ; Of these, 
practice is the effort to secure steadiness.' 
The commentator explains the same :-' When the mind has become free from the 
modifications :' is separated from tho modifications due to Rajas and  ama as, the ff ow of the 
modifications of the quality of Essence is established in the shape of calm one-pointedness 
and purity. This is steadiness. 
Effort to secure that end,' is the meaning of the locativc case of the word 
sthiti' 
used to signify that object. 
As is the case in the sentence, ' Charmrni dvipinaa hanti,' 
of which the meaning is, ' gills the tiger for the sake of the abi~.' 

Be clears the meaning of effort by giving synonyms : energy, aspiration. He explains: 
-' With the object of attaining that'. 
That' here means steadiness. 
He speaks of the Aeld for the action of that energy :--' Reeort to the means thereof.' 
The means for the attainment of steadiness are the internal and external Yogas, the 
restraints and observances, &c. 
The action of the actor is directed towards the means, 
not towards the fruit. 
Satra rq. 
a: Sa4, that, this, g Tu, and. , 
Dirgha-lr$la: for a long time. M 
h'airan tarya, without interruption. 
Satltla, with devotion, *: 
Asevitlab 
being well-attended to. 
. A 
Dridha, bhQmib, firmly rooted, of firm ground, 
well fixed. 
14. And this is firmly rooted, being well-attended 
" Well attended to for a long time, " " well attended to without inter- 
ruption, " " well attended to with devotion, 
9 9  - 
2.e., brought about by 
- 
purificatory action (tapas,, by continence, by knowledge and by faith, it be- 
comes firmly rooted with welcome devotion. The meaning is that its opera- 
tion is not then conqnered all at once by the outgoing habits of the mind. 
But ho~v can practice secure steadiness, when its operations are opposed by the 
highway robber of outgoing habits, which are in existence from eternity ? He explains :- 
a* And this is firmly rooted, being well attended to for a long bime, without interruption 
and with devotion." 
This practice then reaches the state of firmness, bat not at once, inasmuch as, being 
possessed of the three qualities, its domain, the appearance of calmness, is often over- 
powered by the habits of outgoing. 
If again, having even had resort to pratiae of this description, one gives it up, it 
will be overpowered by lapse of time. Hence it showid not be given up. This is the 
meanin g. 
Sfitra 15. 
Drista, perceptible. 
q a h  Anuiravika, scriptural. h 
Visaya, enjoy- 
ment~. - 
Vitri?~asga, in him or of him who is free from thirst for. 
s* 

CH. I .  
ON TRAZL'CE (SAMADHI), 15. 
29 
- 
I 
15. Desirelessness is the consciousness of supre- 
macy in him who is free from thirst for perceptible and 
scriptural enj oyments. 
barn- 
t' 
i%m~MM~sta 
Rmwt f ~ a t r ~ & ; p :  m n w n y s i r m  
e 
mm 
A mind free from attacllment to perceptible er) joymen ts, such as 
women, foods, drinks, and power, and having 210 tllirst for scriptural en- 
joyable~, such as heaven 
C, 
and the attainment of the states of' the Videha 
l 
and tthe 13ralr$il,zys, has, when it comes into contact with such divine and 
worldly objects, a consciousness of its snpremacy, dne to an understanding 
of the defects of the objects, brougbt about by virtue of intellectual illurni- 
nation. This co~~sciousi~ess 
of power is the same as the coilsciousness of 
I 
il~difference to their enjoyment, ancl is devoid of all desirable and undesir- 
able objects as such. Tllis mental state is desirelessness (VairZtgya). 
V~X~ASPATI'S 
GLOSS. 
The author' describes dwirelessness :-" nevirelessness is the conscionsness oi 
sapremacy in him who is freed from thirst for perceptible and scriptnral enjoyments." 
He describes the freedom from thirst for intelligenb and non-intelligent perceptible 
objects :-' women, &C.' 
Power is lordship. Scripture is the Veda.   hose that are known from the Veda are 
I scriptural enjoyments, such as heaven, &c. He speaks of desire for them too : such as 
heaven, &C." 
The Videhas are the disembodied, who live only in the vehicles which serve as in- 
struments (of knowledge and action.) The state of the disembodied (vaidehya) is their 
state of existence. 
Others helieve the P rakpiti only to be the self. They meditate upon the Prakpiti. 
They are merged in tho functional Prakpiti alone. (The functional Prakriti is that in 
which t h e  &ate of the equipoise has been disturbed, i.e., not the Mblaprakyiti). The 
state of the Prak~itilaya is their state of existence. 
Scriptural enjoyments consist of the attainment of these states. He mho is free from 
thirst for scriptural objects, is the same who is free from the desire of attaining heaven &G. 
3 
The question arises that inasmuch as there is absence of desire even for objects 
t at have never been possessed, such absence too would be desirelessness if desireless- 
ness signified only absence of desire. Therefore the commentator says :-' when it comes 
into contact with such divine and worldly objects. ~esirelessness L not the mere 
absence of desire. On the contrary, it is the consciousness of indifference to enjoyment, 
even though divine and, worldly objects be in contact. 
He renders the same plainer : '1s 
devoid of all desirable and undesirable objects as such. ' 
Consciousness of supremacy is the consciousness of indifferepee, freedom from attaoh- 

But then whence does it come ? Be explains :-4 
By virtue of intellectual illu- 
mination. 
8 
The defect of objects is contained in their being surrounded by three-fold pain. 
Intellectual illumination is the full recognition of this fact with the object of removiog 
them. By virtue thereof is the understanding of the defects brought about. 
The authorities speak of four stages in the unfoldment of ccnsciousness :-The 
consciousness of endeavour, the consciousness of diBerence, &he consciousness of one 
faculty and the consciousness of suprem~cy. 
Attachment, &c, are the impurities of the mind, The powers of sensation, action, and 
thought are led by these to work up their several objects. Endeavour is the putting in 
of eifort for burning them, so that the powers may not incline to work upon their several 
objects. This is the consciousness of endeavour. 
9 
When the endea ~wrlr has begun, some of the impurities are found to be ripe ; others 
are being ripened ; and otters again are going to be ripened. The consciousness of 
difference consists in difTerentiating the ripe and ths ripenhg. 
When the powers become incapable of action, the wish alone remains in the mind, 
so far as the ripe ones are concerned. The consciousness 6f this state is called ' the 
consciousness of the one faculty. 
9 
When physical and ultra-physical objects of enjoyment take up the position of 
receding, the position of indifference even to the wish, iu beyond the three stages of con- 
scioumess, and is called the consciousness of supremacy. The object of the Arst three 
having been fulfilled by this alone, they have not been mentioned separately. Thw 
all is plain. 
Satre 16. 
m 
* T&, that. mq Param, is higher. 
ga9 Puru?~, of the Purusa. 
eni): 
Khybteb, due to the knowledge. y Gupa, to the qualities. 
Vaitri?pyam, 
indifference. 
16. The same is Higher, when there is indifference 
to the " qualities," due to the knowledge of the Puruga. 
t b t q  W ??Fe ?r3m~~mpH19  it@ d& illjir 
a(~srfMQ 
flGqa1ani-1 
l 
kMrn,~b* 
9.cm 
tg 
4kMh 
II 1% l1 
1 
VYASA. 
He who sees the defects of the perceptible and scriptural objects of 
enjoyment, is indifferent (to them.) 
He whose Will-to-know is saturated with the notion of the diutinc- 
tive nature of the Yuruga, brought about by the purity of the efiort to 
know him, becomes indifferent to the ' qualities, ' both in their manifested 
and unmsnifested state. 

CR. I. 
ON TRANCE ( S A M A D ~ I )  
.26. 
31 
There are two forms of desirelessness. 
Of these the latter is but the 
\ 
I 
light of spiritual lcnowletlge 
When this light shines, discrimination 
arises. Then the Yogi tllidrs thus :-Whatever 
was to be obtained has 
been obtained. The afRictions that were to be destroyed have been 
destroyed. The fast-jointed chain of life which, when it is not broken, 
there is or occurs birth after death aud death after birth, has been broken. 
1)esirelessness is but the highest perfection of spiritual lcnocrledge ; and 
absolute independence (Itaival ya) is nothing else. 
VBCHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Having described tlio Lowor desirelessness, the author now describes tho Higher : 
I 
The same is Higher when there is indifference to the ' qualities,' due t o  knowledge of 
the Purusa." 
He shows that Lower desirclcssness is the antecedent to the Higher, and that it is the 
entrance t o  that. Lower Desirelossness is shown by the words, '' fie who sees the defects 
of perceptible and scriptural objects of enjoyment, is indifferent to them. 1 )  
Brought about by the effort to know the P u r u ~ a  ; " the knowlc&e of the P u r n ~ a  
is his recognition by means of the Vcda, by inference and by the teaching of the masters. 
The" effort to know ' consists in the rcpcated resort to the means. The purity of the 
knowledge consists in the stcndy flow of the quality of essence (sattva), due to the 
removal of active disturbance (rajas) and inertia (tamas). This brings about the recogni- 
tion of the distinct natures of the Puruss and the " qualities. " The Purusa is pure 
and infinite. The ' qualities ' arc contrary thereto. The Yogi whose intellect is saturat- 
ed by the recognition, is spoken of as such. The trance known as the Cloud of Virtue 
is spoken of here, 
Such a Yogi is entirely free from attachment to the ' qualities,' whether possessing 
the characteristic of the manifested or the unmsnifested ; so much so that he is free from 
attachment even to the mental phenomenon of the recognition of the distinct nature of the 
Objective Essence and the Puru~a, which itself is a manifestation of the qualities. 
Thus there are two forms of clesirelessness. The former desirelessness exists when 
tshe mental essence (sattva) has been rendered free from inertia (tamas), by the mani- 
festation of its essential naturo (the sattva), but there still remains a trace of the dirt 
of disturbing energy (rajas). 
This view is common t o  the Taustilias, 
.. 
those who are addicted to enjoyment in the 
states. It is by that of course that they become Prakpitilayas. So i t  has been said:-- 
' One becomes a Prak ritilaya by desiyelessness.' 
The last of the two is but the light of knowledge. By 6he use of the word ' but ' it is 
indicated that in that state no objects of knowledge exist. The mcntal essence as it 
exists in that state is similar to-the same, but is besides untainted by the least impurity, 
of Disturbing Energy (rajas). It is therefore said to be t h e  light of knowledge. Mental 
Essence is by nature purity : but i t  puts on impurity by the taint of disturbing energy 
(rajas) and inertia (tnmns). When the impurities of rajas and tlimcr's have been washed 
away by the pure showers of desirelessness and practice, it becomes highly illuminated, 
atld the light of spiritual knowledge is left there alone. 
He shows that in that state the ' qualities' become unworthy of acceptance :--g 
When 
this light shines, discrimination arises in the Yogi.' 
The meaning is that the Yogi be- 
comes possessed of the present discriminative knowledge, when other forms of knowledge 
have disappeared. 

What was to be obtained, i.e., perfect independence (kaivalya) has been obtained. 
As will bo said, ' the wise man becomes free while living. ' The meaning is that this takes 
place because residual potencies only remain with their root cut off. How is i t  that ail 
that had to be attained, has been attained ? Bemuse the aEictions of Nescience, &ce, 
which had to be removed, have been removed together with their residual aroma. 
But then there is the sto* of virtue aud vice which is used as r chain to bind living 
beings to b i ~ t h  
and death in the universe. How then can there be absolute freedom ? 
For this rebson, the commentator says :--'The 
fast-jointed chzin, &C., is broken.' The 
' fast-jointed chaia ' means that whose joints are so firmly and cloeely fastened together 
that they appear to be one whole and do not appear to have been fastened tcgether. 11 
is the pieces of virtue and vice stored, which, as individual pieces in the collection, are 
put together to make the bst joints of B chain. ' The chain of existence ' implies that the 
living being is not freed from the bonds of birth and death. This chain is broken when 
the afflictions have been done away with. And so it has been said :- 
' The vehicle of actions has its root in 11escience.'-2.12. 
'It boars fruit if there is a root.' - 2.13. 
It may be questioned, that inasmuch as restraint is the iuterlnediate ~ t a g e  between 
the fruition of intellection and the Cloud of Virtue, what is this bhat is called the mere 
light of knowledge ? 
I 
For this rea~on, he says :--' Declirelcss~less is the .highest perfection of spiritual know- 
lodge ?' 
The Higher dosirelessnevs is but a form of the Cloud of Virtue, nothing else. -4s 
will be said further 011. 
' To him who deSres nothing even from intellection (prasai~khyiina) comes the trance 
known as the Cloud of Virtue, by consbant luanifostation of discriminatiou (IV. 29.) and 
' Then the knowable is but little, because knowledge is iuhilite, free as it is from all 
veils and impurities.'--(IV. 81). 
For this reason it is that absolute indepenckncte is this and uothing else.--16. 
M Vitarka, of philosopllical curiosity. h 
Vichb~-a, of rneditlation. m 
Al~nnds, of elation. 
afm AsmitEt, egoism. 
IFP. 
Rupa, appearences. 
WWW! 
AnugamBt, by the accompaniment, by the company of, I s  eccornyauisd by. h: 
Bmpmjiiatah, the cognitive trance, 
17. The Cognitive! Trance is accompanied by the 
appearanc es of philosophical curiosity, meditation, e h  tion 
VY BSA. 
Now then, how is the Cognitive T~ance said to appear in those 
whose minds have been restrained by the two means ? ' The Cognitive 

ON TRANCE (SAMADEI), 17. 
Trance is accompanied bj: the appearances of philsophicsl curiosity medi- 
tation, elation, and egoism. 
9 
Philosophical curiosity (vitarka) is a superficial attempt of the mind 
to grasp any object. 
Meditation is a subtle attempt. Elation is bliss. Egoism is the 
consciousness of being one wit1h the self. 
Of these, the first is the Savitarka Trance accompanied by a11 the 
four. The second is the Ncdi tative (Savichiira) where indistinctness ends; 
The third is Elatire (Shanda) qhere ineditation ends. The fourth is 
the purely egoistical (Siismita) wfiere elation ends. All these trances have 
something to grasp (Alambana). 
e 
~BCHASPATI'S 
GLOSS. 
Having described the means, the commentator now puts a question with the ubject of 
introducing the description of the acquisition they lead to, together with tdat of its 
va~ious classes : -' Now then how is the Cognitive Trance, &G.' 
The Cognitive Tranco is 
accompanied by the appearances of philosophical curiosity, meditatiok;elation, and egoism. 
The Cognitive Trance is first described because it precedes the ultra-cognibive. 
The general nature of the Cognitive Trance is to be understood in the accompaniment of 
the natures, i.e., the forms, of philosophical curiosity, meditation, elation and egoism. 
He dcflnes philosophical curiosity :-' A superficial attempt of the mind, &C.' Grasp 
(jbhoga) is the manifestation of consciousness Consisting of the illumination of the nature 
of objects. It is called ' Superficial' because it has the gross phenomena for its sphere of 
action. As the new archer first aims a t  large objects only, and then at smaller and smaller 
ones by and by, so the neophyte in Yoga first learns the nature of gross objects of thought 
only, such as those made of the five MahPbhatafi (physical states of matter), the four- 
armed god, &C.; and then the subtle ones. 
In this way the grasp of the objects by the mind becomes subtle. Meditation has 
for its sphere of action, the causes of the gross phenomena, the subtle elements, the five 
tanmltras, the manifested and the unmanifested essence of matter (the libga and the 
ali nga). 
i 
Fr 
Having thus shown the range of the objective phenomena, he now shows the range of 
4 
the instrumental phenomena :-' Elation is, &C.' Elation is that blissful modification of 
consciousness, which consivts in the illumination of the mind, as regords the acts of 
sensation, with gross phenomena for their objects. The nabare of the powers of sensation 
is to enlighten, because they are born out of the principle of individuality, with the 
quality of essentiality (Sattva) predominating. Plcnsure is a manifestation of the cluality 
of Essentiality (Sattva). Acts of sensation too are therefore of the nature of pleasure. 
The manifestation of consciousncss consisting of the illumination of Lhis aspect is bliss. 
He describes the Cognitive Trance having the subject (Grihitpi) for its sphere of 
action :--' Egoism is t h e  consciousncss of being one with the self.' Egoism is the stlbtle 
cause of the instrumental powers inasmuch as they are horn out of i t ;  and this ~ g ~ i s m  
appearing as the self, t h e  sul~ject is t h e  c,~nsciousness of being one with t h e  self. Tflis 
Cogllitjive Trance has the snbject for its sphere of action, because the subject is always 
hidden behind egoism. 
He mentions other minor clifferences of all the foqr :--' 
The first, &C.' 
The cause is 
always present in the effect, as its antecedent state; not so the effect in the cauq~, 
6 

PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
Therefore, this superficial range of consciousness is accompanied by all the four-the 
gross and its causes, the subtle, the instrumental and the subjective. The others have 
three, two and one cause, respectively as their spheres of action, and they have therefore 
three, two and one appearance, respectively. 
He distinguishes the ultra-cognitive :-g 
All these, &C.' 
ab the 
former, the preceeding, all the three together means having for its preceding the 
notion of cessation, preceded by the notion of c&sation. -
:
 
Bamskbrs 
I 
Se~ah, in which remain only the ( %t ) residual potencies or impressions. ( *) 
m: Angab, the other. 
18. Preceded by the constant repetition of Qe notion 
of cessation is the other ; in which the residual potencies 
only remain. 
+ 
3TmwWTT: ?m&: RWm: 
m 
M m a r  * 
I m m * :  U- 
m m  VFrwi~ Rqi: d
t
a
:
 
II pc II 
VYASA. 
What now ale the means and the nature of the ultra-cognitive 
trance ? 
" Preceded by constant repetition OF the notion of cessation is 
the other in which the residual potencies only remain." 
The ultra-cognitive trance is that state of mental restraintl, in which 
all its modifications cease frotn action and remain only i n  posse. Its 
means is the Higher desirelessness. 
Inasmuch as any form of practice having an objective phenomenon 
for its basis, cannot become the means of achieving it, the notion of 
cessation which is nothing substantial, is here inacle the basis ; and that 
is devoid of any objective phenomenon. By the constant repetition of 
this notion, the mind having no object to grasp, becomes as it were, 
non-existent. The trance being thus seedless, is the ultra-copi tive. 
VACHAE~PATI'S G LOW. 
The commentator asks a question to introduce the ultra-cognitive, whose discussion 
is now in order :-' What now, &C.' 
" Preceded by the constant repetition of the notion of cevation is the other, in which 
the residual potencies only remain." 
The words, 'preceded by the constant repetition of the notion of cessation,' show 
the means; the remaining words desoribe the'nature. The words, ' in which the residual 
potencies only remain,' are explained as, ' in which all its modifications cease, &C;' 

ON TRANCE' ($AMADHI), l8,lQ. 
4 
The words, 'preceded by the constant repetition of the notion of cessation,' are 
explained by the words, 'Its means is the Higher desirelessness.' 
Cessation is the absence of mental modifications. Its notion is the cause. Ifs prac- 
tice consists in its repetition over and over agam. That which this repetition precedes 
is described as such. 
Now he says why the lower desirelessness does not become the cause of restraint 
(nirodha) :-l 
Inasmuch as any form of practice having an objective phenomenon W its 
basis, &C.' 
The cause must be of the same class as the effect, not of a contrary class. The 
desirelessness which has an objective phenomenonofor its basis is contrary 
the effe6t ; 
the trance, that is to say, which has no object for its basis. It is therefore proper that 
it should be born only from a cause which has no objective phenomenon for its basis, the 
- 
mere light, that is to say, of spiritual knowlcclge. It is only the trance known as the 
cloud of Virtue, born as it is from the pure essence of the Will-to-know with t h e  impuri- 
ties of the rajas and t h e  tcimns entirely removed, and the objects thereof left behind, 
that is infinite, sees the defects of objects and having given them all up, stands in its 
own nature, that can properly become the cause, as having no object for its basis, of the 
seedless trance, in which tho residual potencies only remain ; because they are similar 
in nature. 
' Is made the basis ' :-is made dependent upon that. 
Becomes as it were non-existent :-because it does not produce any effect in the shape 
of mental modificationrs. 
The seedless is that which has no object for its basis. Or, it may be said that the 
seed consists of the vehicles of afflictions and actions. This is said to be the wedless, 
because the afflictions and actions have gone out of it. 
Slltra 19. 
rrs Rhava, the objective existence. m: 
pratyayab, the cause, i.e., caused 
by *bjective existence. 
f+&-~E(fm~rq 
Videha-prak~itilaykhrla, to the videhas 
( the gods ) and the prakritilayas that merged (m) in nature M. 
19. Is caused by Objective Existence for the 
Videhas and Prak$ilayas. 
l 
This is of two descriptions :-brought 
about by Objective Existence 
nnd brought about by the practice of the means. 
In the case of Yogis 
it is brought about by the practice of the means. In the case of ths 
Videllas and the Prakritilagas it is caused by Objective Existence. 

l 
36 
P~TANJALI'S YOGA. 
In the case of the Videhas, the gods, it is caused by Objective 
Existence, because they enjoy a state of something like absolute freedom 
(kaivalya) with a mind functioning only so far as its own residual potm- 
&S 
are capable of, and wbo while thus enjoying, live out the state 
of life, which is the fruition of their residual potencies. 
Similarly do the Prak~itilayas enjoy a state of quasi-isolation with 
a mind which has its mork still before it, hut m h k h  remains merged in 
the Praklitis, as long as it does not come ba& by virtue of the mork still 
before it. 
V~~CHASPATI~S 
GLOSS. 
Now the author dcscribes a sub-head of tlhe Inhibitive Trance, being necessary as it 
is for deciding which is to be adopted and which to be rejected :-' This,' the inhibitive 
tmnce, 'is of two descriptions,'-caused 
by the practice of the means of achievement 
and brought about by Objective Existence. 
The means are faith, &C., to be described later. That which is brought about by 
these means, is the inhibitive trance so spoken of. 
That in which living beings are born is Objective Existence. It is Nescience. The 
modification of consciousness which consiste in the identification of the not-self,--the 
forms consisting of the elements and the powers of sensation and action and the Pra- 
kpitis, known as the MQlaprakyiti, the Mahat, the Ahadklra and the five tanm&tras,- 
with self appears in the Taustikas 
. 
who have attained t.he states of the lower desireless- 
ness. This notion about the Objective Existence, becomes the antecedent of one descrip- 
tion of the Inhibitive Trance. This is spoken of as having been brought about by Objec- 
tive Existence. 
Out of these two the one brought about by effort, is for the Yogls, who work for 
freedom from Objective Existence. By the mention of this distinction the other is denied 
to those who follow the path of absolute freedom (Moksa). 
Well then, in whom is it caused by Objective Existence 3 The reply is given by 
the aphorism :-' Is caused by Objective Existence in the case of the Videhas and the 
Prak pitilayas.' 
The Videhas and the Prokpitilayas are distinct from each other. The meaning is 
that this trance is so caused for both of them. 
The author explains this :-! For the Videhas it is caused by, &C.' 
Those who recognize either of the elements or the powers of sensation, action and 
thought as the self, and so constantly devote themselves to them, that their internal 
organ is fully saturated with that idea, remain, after separation from the body, immersed 
in the same elemental, sensuous and f~nctional forms ; and all that remains of their mind 
ia the habit of their particular devotion. They are called the Videhas (the disembodied) 
because they are free from the physical bodies, It i s  they who, with a mind capable of 
moving only along the line marked by habit, enjoy a state of something like absolute 
freedom, but are withont the physical bcdy. This state resembles the state of absolute 
independence, because the modifications of the mind are suspended for the time being. 
It however differ3 from absolute freedom, in the possession of the power of having to 
perform work still to be done. 
The reading in some places is " upabhoga" instead of 
upayoga" in the text. Upa- 
bhoga means enjoyment. The meaning of this alternative reading would be that the 
residual alone are the objects of enjoyment and not the modificationq. 

CR. I. 
ON TRANCE (SAMADIU), 19, 20. 
37 
When the limit has been reached they live out the state of life which is the hition 
of their residual potencies. 
They come back to be born again. 
So says the V b n  
Purana :-- 
U Those who devote themselves to meditation upon the powers of semtion, action 
and thought, live in this state for ten Manwantaras. Those who devote themselves to the 
elements live in that state for full one hundred Manwantaras." 
Similar are Prakritilayae. They believe one of the P~akpitis, tho onmanifested (MQla- 
prakpiti), the undifferentiated phenomenal (Matat), and the principle of individuality9 
to be the self. 
Their internal organs are saturated with the idea of devotion to 
either of the Prakpitis. They are immersed after their separation from the physical 
body, in the ono of these Prakpitis, which thoy have made the object of their devotion. 
But their minds have not yet fulfilled the object of their existence ; they have etill work 
before them, 
The mind would fulfil the object of its existence, if while following this very course 
of thought, it would also manifest the discrimination of the distinct natures of t h e  
Purnp and objective existence. If on the other hand this con~oiousness be not generat- 
ed in the mind, it has not folfllled ite object, and is therefore said to have its work still 
before it. The Prakpitilayas having their minds merged in the ~ r a c ~ i t i s ,  
with its work 
still undone, enjoy a state of something like absolute freedom as long as they do not come 
back by virtue of the work yet to be dpne. Although the mind has become similar to the 
Prakriti, yet they come back when the limit has been reached. Then they acquire the 
conscionsness of the distinct natures of the Purusa and the objective existence. As 
on the cessation of the rainy season, the body ~f the frog is assimilated to the earth, 
and comes back to life again on coming into contact with rain-water, (so does the mind of 
the Prakpitilaya). 60 says Vayu :- 
" For a thousand Manwantaras, the Abhim lnikas, those who identify themselves 
with the Prakpitia ; and for ten thou~and Manwantaras the Buddhas remain without pain. 
Thoso who devote themselves to the Unmanifested remain in that state for a hundred 
thousand Manwantaras. The computation of time does not exist on reaching the Nirguva 
Puruqa." 
I 
Thus this state also is given up, being subject to re-births. 
graddhb, faith. 
Fird Virya, energy. 
Smyiti, memory. & Samhdhi 
trance. m Prajfib, discernment. : 
Pfirvakab, having before, preceded by. 
itaresiim, for others. 
20. For others it is preceded by faith, energy, 

It is brought about by the means of achievement for the Yogia. 
Faith is the pleasing wishful contact of mind with the object of 
pursuit. It sustains the Yog!, like a mother. 
Energy is born in him who 
pursues knowledge with faith-. Uemory comes to help when he is possess- 
ed of energy. 
On the appearance of memory, tile mind ceases to be. 
disturbed and passes into trance. 
When the mind is entranced., discri- 
mination appears, by which it knows an object as it is. By constant 
comes the ultra-cogni tive trance. 
V~CHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
The author describes the fiequence of the means of the achievement of this trance 
by a Yogi :-" For others it is preceded by faith, energy, memory, trance and discernment. " 
But the devotees of the powers of sensation, action and thought are also possessed 
of faith. For t h i s  reason he says :-l 
Faith is the pleasing wishful contact of the mind with 
the object of pursuit,' and t h e  object of the pleasing wishful pursuit of the mind here 
is the ul tra-cognitive trance, a s  i t  comes into existence with reference thereto, after the 
nature of the objective world has been known by the Veda, by inference aud by t h e  
teaching of the masters. There can he no wishful contact in the case of those who 
confound the powers of sensation, &C., with t h e  self. In their case it is the opposite of the 
pleasing wishful contact, because their confusion has its origin in all-round forgetfulness. 
The powers of sensation, &C., cannot thus be objects of faith. 
He explains why that alone is faith :-' It sustains the Yogi like a kind mother.' 
The 
1 
meaning is that it does not let him fall down in t h e  wrong path, leading to the destruc- 
f 
tion of its object. 
I 
It is this particular wishf~~lness 
which gives birth to energetic effort guided towards 
the object wished for. Therefore he says :--' Energy is born in him when he pursues know- 
, 
ledge with faith. ' 
11 
Memory means keeping it present in the mind, thinking thereupon. ' Undisturbed 
means not only occasionally steady, not distracted. ' 
'1 
b b  Passes into trance " :-Trance 
is here the trance which is described as a branch of 
1" 
Yoga. The restraints and observances also are indicated, inasmuch as trance is 
mentioned there as coming after them. Thus he who has made all the branches of Yoga 
his own, reaches the stage of cognitive trance. This is what he says :--U When the 
mind is entranced." 
That is to say, when the highest limit of intellection is reached. 
He explains that the ul tra-cognitive is born when the cognitive precedes it : - By 
the constant practice thereof and by desirelessness with raference to the objects thereof 
at each stage comes the ultra-cognitive trance. ' It is t h a t  which is the means of achieving 
absolute freedom. Because the suppression which comes after the mainfestation of the 
knowledge of the distinct nature of the Purup and the will to-know, is t h e  final sup- 
pression which renders it unDecessary for the mind to go on working ; inasmuch as it 
has now done t h e  whole of its work and fulfilled the purpose of its existence. 
Sirra 21. 
* m m :  11 99 ll 
, 
613 Tivra, keefi. 
G h  Samvega, the consciousness of supremacy. 
Tivra samveg&nbm, for those haring consciousness of supremacy, for the 
extremely energetic. m: Asannab, proximate, speedy. 

CH. I. 
ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 21,22. 
39 
21. Proximate for those whose consciousness of 
supremacy is keen. 
VYASA. 
There are nine descriptions of such Yogk. Their application to the 
means of achievement is mild, middling or intense. Thus some are of 
mild energy, others of medium energy, and others again of intense 
energy. Of these, the mildly energetic are three-fold, those having mild 
consciousness of supremacy, those having middling consciousness of 
supremacv, 
., and those having keen coz~sciousness of supremacy. 
Simi- 
lady, those of medium energy and those of intense energy. Of these, 
the attainment of trance and the fruit of trance are near to those who 
are intensely energetic in their application to the rneans of achievement 
and possess a keen consciousness of supremacy. 
VACHABPATIB GLOSS. 
If faith, &C., are the means for the attainment of trance, then trance and its fruit 
would accrue to a11 without distinction. Attainment however is noticed in some only, 
- 
non-attainment in others. In some cases attainment is distant; in others it is very 
distant ; in other cases however it is accomplished very soon. To meet this the Commen- 
tator says :-6 
There are nine descriptions of such Yogis, &c. 
S 
The means of achievement are faith, &c. 
They are of mild, middling and intense 
energy in their application, by virtue of tlhe habits of previous lives. The Yogk possessed 
of them are spoken of as such. 
Consciousness of supremacy is desirelessness. That also is mild, middling or keen by 
virtue of the habits of previous lives. 
Among these Yogis, the speedy attainment is shown such as it is by the Aphorism :-- 
It i(l near to those who are possessed of keen conscionsness of supremacy. Tbis much is the 
aphorism ; the rest is t h e  commentary. The fruit of thelcognitive trance is the d t r e  
cognitive, and of that absolute freedom. 
Sdtra 22. 
W Mridu, mild. .iw hladhya, middling. d h m  Adhimltra, intense. p- 
- 
\
.
 
Mridumadhyiidhimiitratviit, by mild, middle and intense natures. 
m: 
Tatah, thence, further. aaR Api, also, (further). m: Videhsab, 
. 
differentiation. 
22. A further also differentiation by mild, middl- 
ing and intense. 

m: &urdbft 
I[ 33 e 
VYASA. 
Mild-intense, middling-intense and intense-intense. 
There is differ- 
entiation by that too. 
By that differentiation too the attainment of trance 
and its fruit becomes the speediest in the case of one whose application 
is intenss and whose 
- i 
consciousness of supremacy is keenly intense. 
.> 
~BCHASPATI~S 
GLOSS. 
This has been explained by explanations already given of the commentary. 
S$tra 23. 
m fivara, of ~ d d .  d'%m Prapidhha, feeling o d ~ i ~ r e s e n c e  
or worahip, 
devotion. t f c - m ,  f dvarapraQidh&n&t, by feeling the omnipresence of God, 
23. Or, by feeling the omnipresence of God (k 
wara). 
lloes trance become speedier of attainment in this way only ? Or, 
is there any other means too ? ' Or, by feeling the onmipresence of God. ' 
fdwara drawn towards him by the kind of devotion which consists i n  the 
feeling of His omnipresence, becomes gracious to him by merely wishing 
attainment. By His merely wishing the attainment, trance and its fruit 
become speedier of attainment for a Yogi. 
~ACKASPATI~G 
GLOSS. 
The Commentator puts a question for the purpose of introducing the next aphor- 
ism :-6nocs trance become speedier, &c. ' The aphorism is the answer. 
Or, by feeling 
the omnipresence of God. ' 
' Reeling the omni-presence' means a particular kind of devotion of the mind, speech 
and body. 
nrawn towards" means brought face to face. 
6 4  Wish for attainment means 
that any oue may get something which he has not got, but which is desirable. 
L Merely ' 
signifies not by any other effort. The rest is easy.-23. 
Sctra 24. 
$q Kleda, of affliction. 6 Karma, of action. h 
Yipbka, of fruition. 
d: 
Aiqaih, by the vehicles. m: Aparbmri?tab, not touched. m-f%h 
l 
Puyn$a, ~idesab, a distinct Purasa. M: fdvarab, God. 
Z 

OH-. 
I. 
ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 24. 
41 
24. I*~wara i s  a distinct Puru~a, untouched by the 
vehiclee of affliction, action and fruition. 
Now who is this called Pdwara (God) that is neither the h1Qls- 
pr&riti (the root of matter) nor the P u r u p  (the conscious principle of the 
human constitution)? 'Idwara is a distinct 'Puruga, untouched by the 
vehicles of afliiction, action and h*oi tion. 
9 
The afflictions are Nescience and others. The actions are good or 
bad. Their fruition is the effect they bring aboutl. Habits following them 
in their qualifications are the vehicles. 
These while really existing in 
the mind, are attributed to the Purusa, as he is the d l j o ~ e r  of their fruit, 
just as victory or defeat of the soldiers is attributed to their master. 
He 
who is not touched by this experience, is the distinct Purusa, fdwara. 
Are all those then who have reached the state of absolute freedom 
fdaaras and there are many such for they have reached the state of 
absolute freedom a£ ter cutting the three bouds ? 
No, Idcvara never had, 
nor xi11 Irave, any relation to these bonds. As fdrmer bouclage is known in 
the case of the emancipated, not so in the case of Pdnara. Or, as future 
P 
bondage is possible in the case of the Prakyitilayas, not so i s  the case of 
' 
Idwara. Re i s  ever free, ever the Lorcl. 
O 
I 
# 

Is there any, or, is there no reason for this supremacy of the Lord, un- 
limited by time, and due to His taking up the Universal Supreme Essence? 
Thereasonforthatis thesacrecl teaching. 
What then is the authority 
of the teaching ? The authoritv 
V 
is the supremacy of His Universal 
Essence. These two, the supremacy and the sacred teaching, exist in 
the Universal Essence of Pdwara eternally related to each other. For this 
reason does it become possible thn- t He is ever free, and ever the L o d e  
And this divinity oE His is free from excess or equality. 
Tt is not 
exceeded by another divinity. 
Whichever is the Highest, 
*ust 
he the 
divinity fdmra. For this reason wherever  here is the culrniliation 
of this divinity that is fdwara. 
Nor is there any divinity equal to that. Because, in the case of 
equality, if one of the two equals says with reference to a common ol~ject 
of their attention, ' let this be new, ' and the other says, ' let this be old,' 
then one thing only necessarily happening, unrestrained fulfilment of the 
wish is interfered with, and one hecorues less than the other. 
Furtlrer it 
cannot be that two equals should at once possess an object desi~*e(l 
hy 
both. 
Because the wishes are contradictory. Hence he done is h - n r a  
whose divinity is free from equality or excess, and He is -a -distinct 
Puruy~--24* 
V~CHASPATI~S 
GLOSS. 
The world is made of the conscious and the unconscious principles only. There is 
none else that goes to make it, 
If hwara is unconscious, He must be the Millaprakpiti, 
comprehending as it does all the non-intelligent modifications. If this be so, then there 
can be no such thing, by reason of his being non-intelligent that he should be brought face 
to face with the devotee. If, on the other hand, he is intelligent, then too it is impossible 
that he should be brought face to face with the devotee, because the power of conscious- 
noss is by nature indiffe~ent, and because bwara is not like other Puruys in evolution, 
on account of the absence of any connection with the principles of egoism, &c. 
Further- 
more how is it possible that he should possess a wish for 6he attainment (of trance by the 
devotee) ? 
This is the meaning of the question, now who is this iswara, &C.? 
The answer to t h e  
question is given by the aphorism:-'i8wara 
is a distinct Purusa tntouoied by the 
vehicles of affliction, action and fruition.' 
Nescience (avidy9) and others are the afflictions (kleias), so called, because they 
afflict the Purusa in evolution with various painful blows. Good and bad actions arc 
virtue and vice. They are called actions metaphorically because they are born from 
actions. Their fruition consist8 in life-state, life-period and life-experience. The vehicles 
are $0 called, because by their means the residue which show themselves as fruitions, are 
embedded as potencies in the substance of the mind. 
i 
As long as the karma which brings about the manifestation of the 1ife.state of 
a camel does not bring into play the potencies of t h e  experience which having been 
d 
generated by previous existence, are: suited to t h e  life-state of a camel, the experience 
suited to the life-state of a eau4 cannob be caused. Therefore there must be a potency 

OH* I. 
ON TRANCE (SAMADIZI), 24. 
- 
- 
- 
P 
P 
I 
I 
oausing the subsequent experience of the life-state of a camel, and it must be poesessed 
of qualities similar to the experience of the life-state of a camel. 
Another question arises. What is the use of adding the words, untouched ' by the 
vehicles of affliction, action and fruition ' in the aphorism, seeing that afflictions, &C., are 
the characteristics of the Will-to-be, and that they never -touch the Purusa and there- 
fow the mere use of the word Puruya would have implied that he was untouched by 
them ? For this reason, he says :-' These while really existing in the mind are attributed 
to the Puru~is' in evolution. Why ? Because he is the enjoyer, the intelligen't agent of 
their fruit. Hence i t  is possible that iiwara being a Purusa might come to be consider- 
ed as having some relation to these. For this reason their special denial of Him is 
proper. Therefore he says that the distinct Puruqa who is not touched by the experience 
present in the Will-to-be even, is iu'wara. 
g Distinct' is that which is distinguishable. He is differentiated from .the other 
Purn~as. With the object of slioming those who are taken out of the conception of t,he 
word iiwara by the use of the word ' distinct, ' he first states an objection and then replies: - 
A11 those then who have reached the state of absolute freedom. There are three kinds of 
bandages,-the bondage of the Prgk~itic 
modifications in the case of tbe Videhas, the bond- 
age of the Prakpitis in t h e  case of the Prakritilayas, and the bondage of honour, &C., in 
the case of those who experience the divine and worldly enjoyments. Tbose whose mind 
are saturated with devoted thought of the Prakritis, reach the state of submersion into 
the Prakpiti~ immediately after separation fro111 the physical body. Ror this reason 
the others are spoken of as being bound at the previous end (of the chain of life) and 
the Prakritilayas are spoken of as being bound only at the next, the future end only ; the 
previous and the second bondages being denied to them. Thus he shows the distinction in 
brief :-g 
He is always free, always the Lord.' 
Divinity consists in the possession of knowledge and the power of action (Kriyh &M). 
In this connection he puts the question :-'Has 
this supremacy of the Lord, unlimited by 
time, &c*' The reason for the question is that knomledge and power of action are not 
pssible to the unchanging constint power of consoio~~sness. It has been said that they 
live in the purified mental essence, when the rajas and the tamas have been removed. 
Further, it is not proper that jiwara who is ever free should become related even to 
t h e  Highest Mental Essence, which after all has its origin in Nescience, as an owner to the 
m 
thing owned. 
For this reason it is said that it is due g to his taking the Waiversal Supreme Essence 
in hand. 
The relation of tjnrara to the Essence of the mind is not due to Neacience 
like that of ordinary Parusas ; and there is therefore no sense of ownership in it. On the 
other hand he takes the Universal Mental Essence in hand thinking that he will thus give 
freedom to men surr ounded by the three sorts of pain, and rescue them, being drowned 
as they are in the great ocean of birth after death, by teaohing them virtue and giving 
them knowledge ; and that this teaching is not possible without the possession of the 
bighest power of action and knowledge ; and that this cannot be possible without taking 
in hand t h e  mental Essence, pure and freed from the dirt of the disturbing energJ 
(raj as) and inertia (tamas). The Lord even though untouched by Nescience, and 
conscious of knowledge, assumes the nature of Nescience, and becomes t h e  possessor 
thereof. H e  does not devote Himself to Nescience as Nescience. A mimic personating 
RBma shows a11 his actions but all the while does not forget himself. This form ofhis 
is assumed, not real. 
Let it be so. Inasmuch, however, as h a r a  has to t a b  up the Mental Essence 
(sattva), on account of the wish of hel&ng the afflicted, and the wish to help ist caused by 
the taking up of Mental Besence, because the wish itself is a modification of the MQlapnr. 

kpiti, the relation of mutual support is evident. To remove this mieconception he says 
that he is unlimited by time. It might be so if creation came first and the wish to help 
manifested afterwards.* But Bhe arrangement of successive creation and dissolution being 
eternal, iiwara draws t h e  world inwards, having fir& made up his mind that he will take 
up the Highest Universal Essence, when the time comes for the wish, arising out of an 
interior manifestation, to reach t h e  limit of its operation. This divine Mental Essence 
potent with the residuum of this determination even though it passes into a state 
similar to that of noumenal matter (Mdlparak~iti) comes to manifestation again in the 
eame state as Mental Essence, by virtue of the potency of that determination, when 
the ulterior limit of the MahOprala~as, the Great Latency, is reached. This happens in 
the same way as in the case of Chaitra who goes to sleep, having made a determination 
that ha must rim early next morning, and awakes at the same time by virtue of the 
potency of the determination. Benco because the determination of tho Lord and the 
taking in hand of the Universal Essence are eternal and &us ever present, their relation 
to each other cannot be that of interdependence, 
Further, it should not be said that the divine Mental Essence does not pass into the 
&ate of the noumenal root-matter, the eqiipoise of the hIillaprakri!i, even at the t i m e  
of the Great batency. 
That which never passes into the state of the MQlapralrriti, can 
never be the effect thereof. Nor can this Universal Mental Essence be the power of 
coneciousness, because it is non-intelligent, by its own nature. If it be not both these, 
then, it would come to this that it must be another class of aubstancc, for which there is 
no authority. This is not proper. There is no substance existing independently of the 
noumenon of matter (Prakfiti) and conscio~~sness 
(Purusa). 
Such IR the greatness Q€ the Lord unlimited by time. Is there any mason, any 
authority for itl? Or, is it without reason, without a~thorit~y? 
The answer is4 Its 
authority lies in the sacred teaching, ' the Vedas, the Brnritis, the ItihAaas and the 
PuriQas. 
The author introduces the considoration of the Sacred Teaching :--U What then is the 
pewon of the Teabhing 3 The Sacre3 Teaching is based upon observltbion and inference, The 
Universal Mental Essence of bhe Lord cannot depend u p o ~  
anybody's 
U 
obsepvation and 
inference. Nor is the Sacred Teaching based upon the observation of the Lord. &me one 
may, therefore, think that the proper Teason fm the existence of the Sacred Teaching ia 
that iiwara desires to manifeeb his own di-ginity, 
He refutes this by saying that the Sacred Teaching has its reason in the Divine 
universal Essence. The mealling is this. Evidently the matctros and the science of life 
ore proved to be t h ~  
works of the 
7 
Lord by the virtue they show in action and by the 
certainty of the things mentioned therein, being never found to be otherwise. Further, 
it is not possible that any one possessed only of the orchary means of knowledge of the 
/ world should be able, even in a thousand human lives, to noet; the agreements and differ- 
ences of various medicinal agents, their various compositions, and those of the mantras, 
by throwing them into and takiug them out of the various classes. It cannot evidently 
be said on the grotud of the existence of the relation of eternal interdependence, that 
the agreements and ditferences are known from authority,. and that authority is again 
based upon tha canons of rgrec~ent and difference. Because during the Great Latency, 
the MahBpralayn, both these manifestations cease to exist. 
Further, it is nob t h e  case that thew is not authority for their existence. It will be 
&own that the universe is a modification of noutnensl matter, the MQlaprak~iti, not 
different from it. It has been observed that things of the same class change :nto different 
forms, W in the case of t h e  ~nodificntions of curds and sugar, Lc., from milk and cane-juioe, 
~t h a  also been observed that differens modifications have the same form in their antece- 

dent state. Similarly the noulnenal root-matter having different modifications in the forms 
of the Great Wiil-to-bo, the principle of individuality and others, must have a form 
common to all in khc antecedent state. This common antecedent st&e of the noutnenal 
matter is the state of equipoise, and that is the state of the Great Latency,. the Mahlpra- 
laya. Hence the Univelaal Essence of the will-to-be of the Lord, shining all round by 
reason of the absence of the veil of, the impurities of disturhiug energy (rajas) and inertia 
(taq~asj, must be considered as established by at least the promulgation by a i m  mob the 
Mantrae and the science of life. And - eimilarly &at collection of the Vedic knowledge 
boo, which has for its object the teaching of how to attain worldly progress and divine 
freedom, can be a divine production only by virtue of the Universal supremacy of His 
Spiritha1 and Mental Essence. It is not possible to have confusios and falsehood, the 
products of disturbing energy and inertia (rajas and tarnas), in the face of the culmination of 
Universal Essence. &mce it is established that the authority of the saored teachfi3g lies 
in the divinity of the Universal Essence. 
Let i t  be so. The teachirlg has its origin in the supremo marlifestati~n of the 
divine Mental Essence, and therefore it shows the highest knowledge. This is an 'instance 
of inference by the canon of residue, not of the authority of verbal cognition. To meet, 
this objection he says :-S 
The relation of these two, the Teaching and the Highest 
festation of divine Mental Essence, &C.' The meaning is that the Teachi~g 
does not give the 
highest knowledge because it is the product of the Bighest Universal Essence, but that it 
teaches because of the existence of an eternal relation of the explainer and the explained. 
Guprernacy exists in the Universal Essence of the divine mind, and the Teaching 
promulgates it, is also present there as such. 
The author states the final concl~~sion 
:--Hence by it, i.e., the teaching which pro- 
mulgat1us the Highest Universal Divine Mental Essence, is i t  known, in the same way that 
the differentiating qualities of the signified are known by the sign, that He is ever free, 
ever the Lord. 
Having thus distinguished Him from other P u r u p s  he now distinguishes Him from 
other lords also :-' This divinity of His is free, &C., ' artcl explains freedom from excess :-- 
a There is no othor divinity, &C.' 
Why? ' Wherever there is the highest, BC.' For what 
reason is His divinity froo from the defect of being exceeded by any other divinities ? 
110 gives the reason :--' Wherever there is the highest perfection of this divinity, &coy The 
meaning is that the divinity of those in whom it has not reached the highest perfection, 
is unreal. 
R'ow he explains freedom from equality :--' Nor is there divinity equal, &cm9 Unres- 
trained fulfilment of wishes means the removal of obstacles from the path thereof. When 
wishcs are checked in their fulfilment, it means weakness. Even if it do not mean weakness, 
it means equality. Wr that reason he says that in both cases the unrestrained fulfilment of 
desires is interfered with. The desired effect is not produced, or if it is produced then 
the same thing is found to possess con t d i c  tory qudi ties (which is absurd). With this 
object, he says : In the case cf two equals, &c. ' If the wishes of more divinities than one 
be csn~idorcd as nover being contradictory, then each must be an i&ara. 
But then 
what is tjhe use of having more &waras than one ? The purpose of divine rule is ful- 
dlled by One only. Or, if it be supposed that they perform the work of divine govern- 
ment by common consent, then there would be no supreme Lord, just as in a republic. 
Further in the case of those who believe in the eternal possession of divinity, the 
succession of divinity is improper. Furtherrport? tllere is the defect of cumbereomenesa 
(positing more agents than is necessary for the purposs of bringing about an effect). 
Thus every thing is plain.- 24. 

PATAN J A  L13 YOGA. 
m Tatra, in Him. f;*~, 
Niratiiayam, such as is not exceeded. sin Sal; 
vajfia, of the omniscient. M BPjam, the seed. 
l 
25. In Him the seed of the omniscient is n o t  
exceeded. 
M 5 m RTRWi u4- 
I ~f@@m~rn?T 
Q 
scaller ~nanifestation of in te~fi~ence, 
just :M it is in the case of dimension. 
Wherever knowledge reaches the higbest limit that is the omniscient and 
tllat is a distinct Puruga. Inference is of service only in establishing 
tile 
idea. It has not the power of giving the special qualities. 
The knowledge of His distinctive names, &C., is to be sought out of the 
Vecls. 
Although fdwara has no purpose of His own to fulfil by JIis (crea- 
tion) His (creation) is purposed by compassion for other beings. ' I shall 
lift the Purusa in evolution out of the world by teaching them knowledge 
and vir tne, throughout the mal lifestations (Kalpas), the Latencies (Pralavas) 
and the Great Latencies \ Mahbpmlayas).' This is'. what he proposes to 
Hinmelf. 
And so it has been said : - ' The firat \f7ise Being, the revered 
Great Sage, in formed a self -made mental vehicle 011 t of compassion, and 
gave the teaching to isuri who wished to know.-25. 
~ACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Having thus established the authority of the Sacred Teaching for His powers of 
action and knowledge, he now puts forward the authority of inference for Hie power of 
4 
knowledge :--' ln Him the seed of the Ornniscicnt is not exceeded.' 
He explains :--' The 
seed of the Omniscient, &C.' 

CH. I. 
ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 25. 
47 
The knowledge of things beyond the range of the senses, existing either indivi- 
dually or co'llectivdy, and caused by the appearance of the past and future forms, is 
qualified by the attributes of largeness and smallnesr, on account of the veil of darkness 
covering more of less of the essence of the will-to-be. 
The meaning is that this know- 
ledge is the seed, the cause of the omniscient. One takes in a little of the past, &a., 
another more than that, another the most of all. Knowledge is spoken of as beink more 
or less with reference to the thing known. Wherever this knowledge expands so much 
that it passes beyond the limit of being further exceeded, that is the omniscient. 
This describes only the thing to be known. Now he speaks of the means of knowledge :- 
L The seed of t h e  omniscient must reach the highest limit, &C.' This is the ststemeut of the 
proposition to be proved. The 'highest limit ' means the state of intensity which cannot 
be exceeded. It is not, therefore, by fixing a limib only that the proposition can be estab- 
lished. 
g Inzsmuch as there is larger or smaller manifestation of intelligence :' This is the 
statement of the reason. Every thing which possesses the quality of being more or less, 
has a limit beyond which there is no manifestation of the kind ; as is the case with the 
lotus, the emblic fruit and the Bel tree. The quality of largeness exists in these more or 
less. In the self (&m$), however, the largeness is such that there is no largeness more 
than that. He shows the pervasion (Vyspti). ' A s  in dimension.' 
This means that the 
conclusion does not fail by the qualities of largeness, &ce, being exceptions to the rule. 
Thus the proposition is established. 
It is not necessary that the l q e n e s s  of the parts only should be contributed to 
the largeness of the whole. The fact is that dimension is known to expand by the 
putting to ether of as many largenesses of individual factors re there may be, con- 
g 
sisting of infinitesimal wholes reachiag down to the atoms themselves. In the case of 
knowledge too this rule is not violated : and knowledge can, therefore, he more or less by 
having one, two or more objects of knowledgo. 
Thus there is no exception to the rule, 
(or technically speaking, there is no exclusion of the middle term, which is marke4 by the 
pervasion). 
He summarizes :-' Wherever knowledge reaches, &C.' 
The question arises that there are many Tirthahlibras, such as the Buddha, the &hats 
and the seer Kapila ; why should hot they be considered to be omniscient by this inference 7 
For this reason, he says :-' Inference is of service only.' 
How then is the knowledge of his speciflc qualities to be acquired? Says :-a 
Tho 
knowledge of his special names, &ce' 
Further, teaching of the Buddha, &C., is not properly speaking authority; it only 
looks like authority. The zeason is that it teaches tlhings aghinst all reasoning, such 
as the momentary nature of all objects and the non-existence of the self, &c. It is, there- 
fore, all misleading. Hence that which comes into the mind from the Veda, the Smpiti; 
the Itihhsa and the PurOpa is the only true verbal cognition, the real authority ; md is 
for this reason the only true means of worldly progress and the Highest Good. With tbis 
object the knowledge of special names, &C., sbould be obtained. Special names, such as 
diva, f zwara, &C., are well known in the Vedas, &c. 
# 
By the mention of the word b'&c.," it is understood that He is possessed of the eix 
accessories and the ten unchageables. 
A s  says the VByu P u d p  :- 
g Omniscience, satisfaction, eternal knowledge, independence, constant presence of 
power, infinity of power--these six are said to be the accessories (aigas) of the G q a t  Lord 
by those who know the-law. Similcrly, knowledge,, desirelessness, power of control, 
. 
purificatory action, truth, forgiveness, endurance, oreatiou, the knowledge of the self, 
l 

and being the substratum of all activities-these ten nnchangeable qualities (avysyas) 
always 1,ive in the Great source of all Good.' 
Well let that be. But the Lord is ever satisfied and possessed of the Highest desire- 
leesness. It ia not'possible that He should have any wish for the fulfilment of any objecto \ 
of His own. Further, being compassionate He should be given to the creation of men 
poss&sed of undisturbed ple ?sure. It cannot, therefore, be that He should create a world, 
full of pain of all sorts. Further, a wise being cannot be considered as undertaking a 
useless task. He, therefore, has not created the world, although He is possessed of kriy& 
$&ti, the power of creation. 
Por this reason, he says :-' Although iiwara'has no purpose of His own, &C.' 
compaa- 
nionate help of living objects is His object. The individual mind fulfils its object, when it 
. 
has caused the experience of sound, &C., and t h e  manifestatiou of the consciousness of the 
distinct nature of the self and the not-self. Its activity ceases when it has done so, 
I 
and the I'uruy then becomes absolutely independent of objective existence (kevali). 
Wit11 that object. the compassionate Lord hforms men of the means of obtaining 
knowledge of the- distinct nature of the self and the not-self; because thereby the 
k 
object of the existence of the mind is fnlfilled. idwara, therefore, helping man as He 
does with reference to the performance of pure and impure works by them, is not cruel, 
even thoush He sees their pleasures and pains and feels for them. 
Nom he speaks of +he entrance into the region of compsrsion, for tho sake of explaining 
the means of obtaining the knowledge of the dist.inct natures of tho self and not-self :- 
By teaohing them knowledge and virtue, &c! 
Knowledge and virtue are both to be uncle~. 
st,md together, They manifest the knowledge of the distinct natures of the self and the 
not-self, 
Latency (pralaya) means the and of the day of Brahrni. In this state, the whole 
world except t h e  Satgaloh becomes latent. The Mahiipralaya, the Great Lateno?, ie 
that in which the Gatyaloka and Brahm% himself come to an end. Then the Parueas in 
evolutioll go back to their causes and hence are subject 60 the pain of death. The word 
K a l p a i a o n l y s ~ g g e ~ t i ~ e h e ~ ~ ~  
Themeaning is that the Lord's determination to help the 
Purups refers to the other Pur'qas also, who by virtue of the fruition of their action 
have $0 undergo births and deaths, and who become fme from pain on reaching the state 
of absolute independence. This is the memine. 
the first of those emancipated ones who had gone before among the foll~wers of tho 
sohool. Tho tradition is that Kapila got the knowleilgs by the grace of Mrhedwara j u t  
. 
as he was bort~, and he is 
ag such its a particular kind at Vipyfs inoamations. 
srayambhh is Hiraayagarbha. 
I b  is learnt from the Veda that he too got the howlodge. 
ofthe S&hkhga yoga. The same iiware, t h e  self-existent Vianu, . was the first Wiee 
man, mpila. The meaning is that he is the kwara oP those who proceeded from Svayem- 
Api, too. n: Gurub, the teacher. 
w?h KM-ena, by time. 
Anavach- 
&hed&, owing to the non-limitation, not being limited-by. 

26. He h the Teacher of the Ancients too, not being 
limited by time. 
vylia~. 
The ancient teachers were conditioned by time. Wherever time 
does not exist as condition, that is fdwara, the teacher of the ancient 
teachers too. 
As the knowledge of His supreme p w e r  as existing in the 
beginning of the creation is obtained, so also is it obtained &bout Hie 
existence ae such in other creations and other times. 
V~CHA~PATI'S 
GLOSS. 
Now he shows the distinction of the Lord from Brahmll, &c. He,' 4. e., the one d m  
oribed formerly, ' is (the real aphorism begine here) the teacher of the amients too.' 
He explains -' The ancients, &C.' Time means a century, 40. 
'hoes not exist as a condition ' means time does not approach rra a condition. 
The supremacy of power means the manifestation thereof. ite knowledge is to be 
obtained from the Veda By this arrangement the Lord hwara is deeoriW.-~8. 
S ~ t r a  
27. 
m Taeya, Him. m: Vhhakab, connoting. m: Prwavab, the Sacred 
word-- 
Om. 
27. The Sacred word connotes Him. 
~
~
~
~
:
~ ~ : a m a i p l  
h
i
 
mml3m- 
maq d f f ~ ~ ~ m q ~ f ~ r n  
I MSW 
-m 
~
a
q
 
m em: I eh- 
~
~
f
P
P
?
C
j
t
~
~
 
l mmRYm ikfmgaT 
b * 
: 
&- 
%mm 
Rm I # ~ g -  p a 
I W J f k r c 1 M  B I - - - ~  
11 W ir 
* 
V Y ~ A .  
The sacred word connotes ' Him.' He is denominated by the sacred 
word, the Pragava (A U M). 
Is the relation of the sign and the thing 
signified between these conventional, or inherent as between flame and 
light ? His relation with the sign is inherent and thus ever presant. 
Furthm, the convention of God shows only an object whichqexists (that 
, 
which is inherent). 
As the relation already existing between father 
arid son, is only expressed by convention, this is the father, this the son. 
In other creations too the same convention is adopted on acoeunt of the 
dependence upon the connotative powers of the sign and the thing 
rigni tied. 

V~CHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Now he speaks of His sign (indicator, Vdchaka) in order to explain the meaning of his 
devotion. 
L   he sacred word connotes Him.' 
Explains :--H& is denoted by Pra~ava, &c. 
Introduces the opposite theory by putting a question. Is the relation, &o. 
Signifying is 
laying down, expressing. 
Others, of course, hold that if the relation of word and meaning is inherent, and that 
it is manifeseed by a convention that such and such a meaning is to be denoted by sach 
and such a word, then in the absence of any relation between word and meaning, the 
meaning would npt be conveyed even by a hundred conventions. If no jar exists w h i ~ h  
may be shown by a lamp, even a hundred lamps would not reveal one. It is, however, 
observed that the word ' elephant ' will signify a camel if a convention is made that this 
word will be used to signify an animal of that class. Hence the power to signify is 
conventional. 
Having thus stated their position, he explains his own teaching :-'Its 
relation is 
inherent.' 
This is the meaning. 
A l l  words have the capability of meaning objects of all 
?arms. Their relation with objects of all forms must, therefore, be inherent. And the 
- convention of i6wara is the determining factor and the shower thereof. The division 
of the sign signifying and not-signifying something is also made by is'wara's convention 
or non-convention. This is what he says: 'Further the convention of God, 
&C.( 
He gives an illustration :-"already 
existing between, &C." 
The question arises. Sound is 'a manifestation of the Prak~iti. At the time of the 
Great Latency it passes back into the state of the Prakpiti. Itis power also thereby 
disappears. ' Then a particular verbal sign is born again through t h e  successive states 
of Mahat, &c. But then the power of signification having disappeared, its manifestation 
does not remain possible. For this reason, he says :-'In 
other creations also, &C.' 
Although a word does become one with the Prakriti along with the power, it comes 
back into manifestation along with -the power. As earth-born creature$ becoming one 
with the earth on the cessation of the rains, come back to life on being wetted by showe'is 
of rain water. Thus God makes a convention similar to the conventioh which indicated 
the former relation. Hence on account of the eternity of the succession of similar usage, 
. due to simultaneous knowledge, the relation of word and meaning is eternal. Independ- 
ent eternity is not meant. So say the Agamis. Without the authority of the Agama 
(the Veda) it ia not possible to ascertain that in other creations also the convention is 
the same. This is the meaning.-%?. 
Sfitra 28, 
m Tad, its. 
W: Japab, repetition. 
Tad, its. d Artha, meauing. m 
Bhhvanam, the understanding of. 
Its repetition and the 
its 

l 
CE. I. 
ON TRANCE (SAMADBI), 28, 29. 
V Y ~ S A .  
4 
The Vedic teachers hold that the relattion of word and meaning 
is eternal, inasmuch as one CO-exists with the other. The Yogi who has 
come to know well the relation between word and meaning must con- 
star1 tly repeat it, a d  habituate the mind to the n~anifestat~ion therein of 
I 
its mealling. The constant repetition 4s to be of the Pra.~ava (A U M) 
and the habitual mental manifestation is to be of what it signifies, Pd- 
wara. The mind of the YogP who constall tly repeats the Pranava and 
becomes one-pointed. A d  so it has been said :- 
' Let the Yoga be pi*actiscd through study, and let study be effected 
tliroagl~ Yoga. 
By Yoga and study together the Highest SelI sIlines7-28. 
V~CH~SPATI'S 
GLOSS. 
Having described the sign, he now clescribes the devotion, pm!] idhiha, the means of 
feeling the presence of the Lord everywhere, in all circumstances and phenomena :-b 
Its 
constant repetition and the repeated understanding of its meaning! 
C Explains 
_ 
:-' The 
constant iwpetition of the Pravava, &C.' 
Repeated nnderstanding (Rh$van&) means making it enter the mind over and over 
again until it becomes the very substance of the mental existence. 
What 'attainment does he acquire thereby ? Says : -' The mind of the Yogi who con- 
stantly repeats the Pranava, &C.' The mind feels bliss in the One Lord alone. Quotes a 
verso of Vy6sa in this connection :-And 
so it has been s8id :-The 
Lord then becomes 
gracious to him up to his attaining the faculty of trance (SsmPdhi) and its fruit. -28. 
m: 'l'atah, thence. m-Pratyak, the individual. +m Chetana, Soul. &m: 
Adhigamah, understanding. d3 Api, also, too m Antarhya, of obstacles. 
m: Abhkvab, absence. s Cha, and. 
29. 
Thence the understanding of the individual self 
and the absence of obstacles too. 
\ 
pao p w  
mrer: &r&svdiwsrmi$ ,g$: aPat%ft v: 
~
H
W
I
 
VYASA 
\, 
l
1
 
- And what else comes to him? "The understandiog of the indivi- 
dual self and the absence of obstacles." Wha/mver obstacles there may be- 
diseases, &c. -cease to be by feeling the omnipresence of the Lord ; and 
the true nature of hmself is also seen. It is knownthatjust asfdwara 
ie a Purusa, pure, calm, free and without appendants, such is this 

52 
PA TANJA LI'S YOGA. 
Puru~a also, the self underlying the individual manifestation of the 
Will-to-be. 
t 
V~CHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
What more thar, this ? 
a Thence the understanding of the individual sel.f, and the 
absence of obstacles.' 
The individual self is the Pratyakchetana, the conscious principle 
whose cognitions are contradictory of the real, that is to say, t h e  ignorant P u m p  
In the case of the Wise this turns back on account of the possession of the eternal divine 
egsence. He gets the understanding of the individual self as it really is. 
The obstacle will be described and fheir absence too. 
Whatever obstaoles there may be :' These words contemplate their description. 
The nature of a thing is its own self. By speaking of the nature of the self, the charac- 
teristics fastened on to the self by Nescience (avidyg) are denied. 
The question arises. since igwara is the object of devotion, how is it that the 
Individual unit of consciousness will be known by feeling His omnipresence ? 
It is 
evidently going beyond the mark. In reply to this, he says+-6 
& is iswara, &C.' 
Pure :--free from rise and fall on account ?f ,ionstat.t eternity. 
Calm :-undisturbed 
by afflictions. 
Bree :-he 
from whom virtue and vice keep aloof. For this very reason He ir~ without 
appendants. The ' appendants ' are life-state, life-period, and life-experience.' 
A similarity must necessarily mean some distinction. Therefordnow he distingu'ishsa 
the Individual self from idwara. The self underlying the individual manifestation of 
the Will-to-be.' 
This explains why the word a Individual ' has been added. 
When there are two contradictory objects, the understanding of the one doe8 not 
conduce to the understanding of the other. The understanding of similars, however, 
conduces to the understanding of the other ohjects possessed of similar qualities. This 
happens in the same way as the understanding of one science contributes to the better 
understanding of an allied science. The effect of the analogy is in the understa~ding 
of one's own self, not of t h e  Highest self. Thus all is plain-29. 
4% 
Vyhdhi, disease. 
~ s n  
Stybna, langour. ins Sari~Baya, indecision. 
Pramada, carelessness. 
WRWI Alasp, sloth. dMi Avirati, sensuality, want of 
non-attachment. 4% Bhdnti , mistaken notion. *---$km 
Dardana-alabdha- 
bhbmikatva, missing the point, not being able to see a place which is just seen. 
wmfhm ~navasthitatva, instability. kkb: Chitta-vik~epbb, causing distrac- 
tions, or divertion of the mind. 3 Te, these are; mmm: Antartiyhh, the obstacles. . 
30. Disease, langour, indecision, carelessness, sloth, 
sensuality, mistaken notion,, missing the point, instability,- 
these causing distractions are the obstacles. 

1 
CB. I. 
ON TRANCE ( S A ~ ~ ~ ~ D E I ) ,  
30. 
53 
VYASA. 
Now what are the obstacles that distract the mind ? How many 
are they and what is their nature ? ' Disease, &C.' 
There are nine ob- 
~taclee causing distraction to the mind. These exist with mental modifi- 
cations. 
In their absence they do not exist. The mental inodifications 
have been described before. 
Disease is the disturbance of the eqdibliurn of the humours, 
chyle and the organs of the bod ye 
L -  
Langour is the indisposition of the mind to work. 
Indecision is the notion touching both sides of a question : It 
might be thus or thus. 
Carelessness is want of resort to the means of trance. 
Sloth is the inertia of mind and bodv. 
U consequent upon lleaviness. 
Sensuality is the desire conseqnent upon objects of sense having 
taken possession 
v 
of the mind. 
% 
Mistaken notion is False kimwledge. 
Missing the poi u t, ia the non-attainmen t of the state of trance. 
Instability is the incapacity of the mind to keep hi any state that 
has been attained, because it becomes stable only when the state of trance 
has been reached. 
These distractions cf the mind are designated the enemies and the 
obstacles ,of Yoga. 
/ 
V ~ ~ C H A ~ P ~ T I ~  
GLOSS. 
He puts a question :-' Now what are the obstacles ?' 
The answer consists of the 
words, distractions of t h e  mind." 
Again h a  asks for the specific enumeration :--' How 
many, &C.' 
The answer is ( Disease, &C.,' 
the whole aphorism. The nine obstacle8 are 
mental manifestations which stand in the way of yoga. They are contrary to Yoga and 
disturb the mind. They are called obstacles, because they turn the aspirant away from 
the direct path of Yoga. 
He gives the cause of their being the antagonists of Yoga :-g 
They manifest with 
mental modifications! 
Indecision and False knowledge are antagonistic to the inhibition 
mind, because they are mental modifications. The others, however, which are not mental 
of the modifications such as disease, &C., likewise antagonistic, because mental rnodifl- 
cations manifest themselves along with them. 
He explains the meaning of the words :gb 
Disease, &C.' 

The humours are bile, mucus and gas, called Dh(itas, because they keep up the body. 
Chyle (raqa) is a particular modification of foods and drinks. The organs of the body 
are the organs of sensation and action. Disturbance .of equilibrium means ono of these 
becoming more and the other less than what is necessary. The indisposition of the mind 
to work means incapacity to work. Indecision or doubt is knowledge touching both sides 
of 
qnestion. Although the basis of doubt is the knowing of a thing to be what it is not 
and therefore doubt and Pals0 knowledge 
not differ from each other, yet doubt is 
separately mentioned here, because it is especially intended to bring out here the special 
characteristic of doubt, the touching and giving up of both sides of a question, which 
makes n sub-head of False knowing. 
Want of resort, to the means of trance ' means the al~sence of these means, the \cant 
of effort. The heaviness of the body is caused by phlegm, &c. 
The heaviness of the mind 
caused by inertia, tal?uls. Desire means thirst for an object. The states of trance 
are lkladlmur ti, &c. If one has reached a particular state of progress in trance and is 
satisfied with it, then he will not reach the higher state and will lose the one already 
attained. Therefore, when a state of trance has been reached, effort must always be made 
to retain it.-83. 
S ~ t r a  
31. 
3 : ~  
Dubkha, pain. %h 
Daurmanasya, dispair, dejection. 'JlipitarPW Afiga- 
/ 
rnejayatva, shakiness. 
Svbsa, i n ~ l ~ i r a t i o n .  W: Prarivb&b, and expiration. 
m V i k q a ,  of distraction. v: 
Saha-bhuvah, companions. 
- 
31. Pain, despair, shakiness, inspiration and expira- 
tion are the 
v companions of these distractions. 
V Y ~ A .  
Pain is either from one's self, or from external terrestrial objects, 
or from the powers of nature. Pain is that affected by which people trv 
W 
to do away with it. 
Despair is the cotdition of the mind consequent upon the non- 
fulfilment of some desire. 
Shakiuess is that whicli muses the organs to shake. 
Q 
Inspiration is the action of the life-force drinking in external air. 
Expiration is that .cvhich throws out the internal gas. 
These are the companions of the distractions of the mind. 
T h y  
appear in him whose mind is distracted. They do not exist in him whose 
mind is entranced. 

CH. I* 
ON TRANCE (SAMADRI), 31,32. 
Now he says that it is not only the nine obstacles, but that pain, Be., too appearing 
os their companion#, act similarly :-' Pain, &C.' 
Pain is that which is cognized as being contxary to the mind for the time. It is from 
i 
one's self, when it is either bodily such as caused by disease, or, mental, such as caused by 
desire, &c. It is from external causes when it is caused by a tiger, &c. 
It comes from 
the powers of nature when it is caused by such things as the planetary influences. .All 
L 
thie pain is cognized by every livi&g creature as contrary to one's being. It is, therefore, 
I. 
to be removed. This is what he says :-'Affected 
by which, Le.' 
When physical life 
I 
I 
drinks in, i.e., takes in external air contrary to one's wish, the act of in-breathing becorn- 
contrary to the branch of Yoga known a4 the Rechaka, the conscious out-breathing). 
1 
When physical life expels the internal air against wish, the act of out-breathing is con- 
trary to the branch of Yoga known as PQraka, the (conscious in-breathing).--& 
pn! Tat, their. 
a
m
 
Pratisedha, preventions. d y  Artham, for, n Elis, of 
one. m Tattva, truth or subject. 
Abhybab, habituation. 
32. For their prevention, habituation to &e Truth. 

56 
PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
TRUTH.' 
For the prevention of distractions, let the mind take to ONE 
TRUTH and make itself habitually familiar with it. 
To h i ~ n  tvho believes in a mind sepalate and distinct for every 
cognized object, in fact a bnndle of notions only, :tnd but momentary (in 
existence) all minds are one-pointed (elriigra) d y .  There is no distracted 
mind. 
If, however, the mind is concentrated on one object, onlv 
W when, 
,I 
having been drawn away from all other objects, it turns eway to one 
object, then it is not separate and distinct for ewry cognized object. 
He who believes the mind to be one-pointed if it flows along si~nilnr 
notions, might opine that one-poin tedness is n characteristic of the 
flowing mind. If so, then the flowing would not be one, because it 
is said to be momentary. 
If, however, it is the ~haracterist~ic 
of a notion which is only n portion 
of the entire stream (of flowing mental phenomena), then it is always one- 
pointed, whether it flows along similar or dissimilar notions ; because in 
thiscase it is separate and distinct for every object. Thus ne mould fall 
upon the non-existence of a distracted mind. Hence the mind is oue, 
has many objects, and is not momentary, but stable. 
Further, if it be tllought that the notions are born, each separate 
from the other in nature, and are not linked (5y the common basis of) 
one single mind, then how mould any one mind remember a notion 
cognized by another. 
A d  horn would any one elljoy the ~ehicle of action 
brought into being by the lwtions of another ? 
Howsoever t1he matter is examined, it iIlnstrates the story of the 
, i 
milk and the comdnng. 
i 
Further, if the mind be separate ancl distinct for every coguized 
* 
object, then the notion of the identity of the self is destroyed. How can 
such notions as, ' I tonoh what I saw,' and ' I see what I touched previous- 
ly,' point to a common knower, when all the notions are separate and 
distinct ? 
The notion of the ' I am ' is always identical with itself and points 
out to but one cogniser. 
But there can be no single cognizer as a common 
- 
basis, if it manifest itself in entirely distinct minds every moment. The 
notion of ' I arn' ss one undifferentiated continuous self is cognized by 
internal perception ; ancl the author; ty' of perception is not to be defeated 
by any other means of knowledge. 
Other means of knowledge work only 
by the power of perception. 
Hence the mind is one and has many objects 
and it changes not every moment.-32. 

CH. I. 
ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 32. 
Introduaes the aphorism which finishes the subject under discussion :-'NOW 
these 
distractions, &C.' 
Now it is on account of the context that this aphorism is spoken of as finishitlg only 
half the subject under discussion. These distractions are spoken of as antagonists of 
the trance to explai11 the object with which they are to be checked. 
I 
Although in the aphorism', ' By feeling the omnipresence of the Lord ' the process , 
. 
of mental habituation only is described, yet deeirelessness also is to be understood, be- 
cause it is a help to habituation. With this iu mind, he says :-' They are to be checked by 
the earno practice and desirelessness.' 
This is said%o finish the subject of practice ': h his aontence is spoken because the 
subject of practice immediately precedes. The ONE TRUTH is God, because that is the 
i context. 
l 
To the Va;n&@kas all minds are one-pointed only ; there is no distracted mind. 
l Hence their teachings and the acts they inculcate, are all useless. With this object 
I 
he says :-" To him who believes, &C." The theory is t h a t  the mind is separate and distinct 
' 
for every object ~ h e t ~ h e r  
it to be a single one in itself, or one out.of many. It remains in 
being only so long as the object shines in consciousness and then disappears at once, not 
going to another object. 
why does not the mind take in another objech after having taken#in one before that ? 
Because it is said to be momentary. This means that existence before and after, cannot 
bo posited of a mind, which cannot be spoken of as remaining the same in more than one 
successive moment of time. 
According to our teaching the mind is not momentary in existence, and remains 
constant, whether t h e  objects of thought be one or manifold. It is not conflned to one 
single object seeing that it takes in and gives up objects every moment and can sd far be 
called distracted, and also that it can cultivate one-pointedness when the modification 
of distractedness has been removed. This teaching and t h e  acts recommended on its 
strength are not useless. With this object, he says :--: 
And if it becomes concentrated, b.' 
Concludes :-g 
Thus it is not distinct a6d separate for every object.' 
Again he introduces the VainPgika :-' He who believes the mind t o  be one-pointed if 
it flows along similar notions, &C.' 
His meaning is stated to be as follows :-' Let it be 
granted that the cultivation of one-pointedness is not possible in a mind confined to one 
moment only and that therefore it is useless to put fmbh effort with that object. The con- 
tinuous succession of minds, however, is unending and not momentary in its nature ; it is 
possible in the succession that distraction may be removed and'~ne-~ointednes~ 
culti- 
vated.' 
I 
He shows the defects of the theory in the case of either of the two statements thereof. 
If in the philosophy of the Vain@hika one-pointedness is a characteristic of the flowing 
mind, i.e., of the un-ending succession of minds, then, there being successive mental 
births for eucceeding mental impressions, there does not exist one flowing mind common 
@ 
to all the successive impressions. But why should it not be SO ? Because in your philoso- 
phy, whatever exists for as long a t i m e  as it may be, must be momentary ; there is nothing 
that is not momentary. 
Takes the other form of the theory :-' If however it is, &C.' If in t h e ' ~ u c c - s i ~ ~  
flow of mental phenomena a notion having the Bighest Good appears a t  a single point, 
one-pointedness with reference to this particular notion may be secured by effort. 
Shows the defects of this theory. The whole of this succesive flow of mental pheno- 
mena may be a flow of either similar or dissimilar notions. It is, therefore, separat.e and 
distinct for every distinct object, and as such takes the form of the Highest Good simply 
8 

for the expression of it, and therefore it is destroyed on t h e  disappearance d the mind. 
B U C ~  
a mind is always one-pointed. There can, therefore, be no distracted mind. It can- 
not, therefore, be that one-pointedness may be cultivated by and after the removal of 
distractednese. Concludes :--' Hence t h e  mind is, &C.' 
Further says, that for another reason taa the mind is one having many objects, and 
ie constant not momentary :-g 
And if it be so, &C.' As the Teaching studied by Maitrs 
is not remembered by Chaitra, and as the fruit of the vehicle of action grown by Maitra 
in not enjoyed by Chaitra, in t h e  shape of virtue and vice, inasmuch as Chaitra is not 
related to it, 60 one notion cannot remember the object of another notion ; nor can one 
notion enjoy the fruit of the vehicle of action grown by another notion. 
But, says the questioner, this line of reasoning will not be violated, if the relation of 
cauee and effect exists ; and it is oil account of t h e  existence of that differentia. that in 
the &dhn 
and Yais'wdnarn sacrifice, &C., the fruit is seen reaching father, mother, 
end son, who are not the performers thereof; and also because thesweetness of the 
mango, seeds, &C., always appears in due course in the fruits thered. 
For this reason, says :-' However is the matter examined, &o.' 
This is the meaning. 
What is tho difference between notions falling into one succession and those falling into 
another, so that a notion falling into one succession may remember and enjoy the notions, 
experienoe and the vehicle of action grown by the notions of the same succession but 
not by the notions of another succession ? S~ccession is not an independently existing 
substancer so that one succession may be differentiated from another succession. And 
it is not proper that a fanciful difierentia may be fastened upon an action. No one aan 
cook if he only fancies the existence of fire anywhere. Further, the -relation of cause 
and effect also is not real, In the caaa of simultaneous existence there can be no such 
relation, as for example, between the right and left horns. In the case of object8 wMch do 
not exist simultaneously, no relation of cause and effect necessarily exists ; because it may 
be that none of them can be predicated of a phenomenon appearing in the immediate 
present. The past and the future cannot exist together as being related to a pheno- 
menon a~pmring 
independently in the present. Therefore, being independent real objects 
as they are, they do not differ from'each other whether they fall in their own or in 
independent successions. The reason is that thex do not come into contact with each 
other, not being related to each other by either natural causation or by succession. 
This logio is like that of the milk and cow-dung cakes. 
All that is prduaed from the cow is milk. 
Cow-duug cakes are produced from the cow. 
l 
Therefore cow-dung cakes are milk." 
This illustrates the story, which means that it surpasses in fallacy even the logic of 
the milk and the cow-dung. 
Furthermore, the destruction of that which has been done, and the appearance of 
that which has not been done, should not be mentioned here 4s an argument. Because the 
mind alone is the doer of acxions, and the mind alone is associated with the pleasures 
and pains born out oi them. It is because the mind enjoys pleasure and pain on account 
of the presence therein of the reflection of consciousness, and because the consciousne 9 
and the mind in which it is present are taken to be one, that they are attributed toMe 
Poru~a. The notions born'in the mind, when the notion of its being the self has already 
come in there, are of such a nature that they alone remember and enjoy their own fruits, 
;l& 
others. And it is not reasonable to say that t h e  nature of a thing may be separated 
from it, and then joined to it again. It cannot be said of the nature of a thing that it 
might or might dot be so, or why is it not so ? 
1 

CB. I. 
ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 32,33. 
59 
He sp~ahe to those who are satisfled with the above :-' Further, if the mind be sepa- 
rate and distinct for every object, b., mental impressions and their memories have the 
~haracteristics of manifestation and latency. They are many and yet the mind in which 
they live,-Le., the notion of the ' I am,' is one and not differen$ for each. This one notion 
of the ' I am ' unite8 all those separate notions into one. How can this one. hold all the 
extremely different notions into i t ~ e l f ?  Inasmuch as there is difference in the causes of 
the phenomena of cognition and memory and also on account of the presence in them 
of the contradictory qualities of manifestation and latency, there can be no single notion 
of reflex condition by virtue of which the mind, in wbich alI thedifferent and contradictory 
notions are generated, may be considered to be a single entiby. 
For this reason, he er ys : -' It is cognised by internal perception.' 
But it may be said that the difference of causes and t h e  possession of contradictory 
qualities refute the truth of this perception. In answer to this objection, ho says :-'.and 
* 
the authority of perception, &C.' 
It is on the basis of perception alone that the unity of material and the contradic- 
tory nature of the characteristics of latency and manifestatioa have been established 
in the NyLyakaniki3 ; and the action of objections in a permanent mind is established in the 
Nyfiyakanika and the Brahmatattva-samiksk Thus all is plain.-31. 
W Maitri, friendliness. m Karupb, -compassion, mercy. 9% 
Mudit$, 
gladnese, complacency. 
Upeksit, indifference of all these. 
Sukha, happi- 
ness. 
g:- 
Dubkha, misery. p: 
h p y a ,  virtue. 
wetlap Apupya, vice. 
Visay&p&m, regarding the subjects, towards the subjects (respectively). m: 
Bh&van&tah, by cdtivating hahita, by constant thinking. fin Chitta, of the 
mind. m, Prasbdanam, purification. 
33. By cultivating habits of friendliness, compassion, 
complacency and indifference towards happiness, misery, 
virtue and vice (respectively) the mind becomes pure. 
How is the embellishment of the permanent mind taught by this 
science, secured ? ' The mind becomes pure bv 
W cultivating habits of 
friendliness, compassion, complacency and indifference towards happiness, 
misery, virtue and vice.' 
Let him cultivate in his mind the habit of 
frielldliness to\varils all those wlro are found in the enjoyment of pleasure; 

PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
compassion* towards 
towards those who 
thus habituating the 
, 
those who are suffering from pain.; complacency 
are virtuous ,; 
indifference towards the vicious. By 
mind to these notions, the white characteristic makes 
appearance. Thence the mind becomes pure. Having become pure, 
it becomes one-pointed and aetaiu~ the state of steadiness.--33. 
V~CHASPGTI~S 
GLOSS. 
NOW the author begins to lay down the means of purifying the mind, which are contrary 
to such vices as jealousy, because trance and the means of its achievement cannot appear 
in a mind, unembellished and full of jeslousy, &c. :-b 
How is the embellishmenCu, &cm9 
Whoever shows friendliness, i.e., a heart ready to help, towards the happy, the dirt 
of envy leaves him. When the mind shows compassion, i.e., the wish to remove the 
miseries of others as if they were his own, towards those who are suffering, the dirt of 
the desire to do evil by others is removed Whoever shows complacency, i.e., pleasnre 
towards virtuously inclined beings, the dirt of envy is removed fr0.m his mind. Rhoever 
shows indifference, i.e., the taking of the middle path and not taking sides, towards the 
viciously inclined, the dirt of impatimce is removed from his mind. 
By this removal of the characteristics of the qualities of disturbing energy (rdajas) 
and inertia (tamas), the white characteristic of essential purity (sattva) manifests itself. 
He becomes possessed of a vevy high n~anifeststion of essential purity. His mind becomes 
inclined to the side of the restraint of mental modifications, because this enlightenment 
is natural to that state. When the mind becomes pnro, it athains the state of steadiness 
and becomes me-pointed by the means to be described. If friendliness, &C., 
are not 
cultivated, the means cannot lead to steadiness.-33. 
Prachchhardana, by the expulsion. W, 
Vid 11 Prap &bhybm, hnd 
by the retentions. 
W V$, optionally. m Prlpasga, of breath. 
34. Optionally, by the expulsion and retention of 
V Y ~ S A .  
Expulsion is the throwing out of the air in the lungs through the 
nostrils by special effort. Retention is the PrSi@iy$rna, the lengthening 
of the duration of the stay of the air outside the lungs. Let merital 
steadiness be optionally cultivated by these. - 34. 
V~CHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Now then he describes the means of steadiness :-g 
Optionally by the expulsion and 
retention of breath.' 
The word optionally refers to the succeeding means. The option is 
not given with reference to the cultivation of friendliness, $C., because they must be 
present along with all (the means). 
Now he explains expulsion :-- 
g The throwing out of the air in the lungs, .&C.' 
By 
special efforts" means such an effort as is laid down in the science of Yoga, by which the 
& ie thrown out of the lungs qlowly. 

CH. I. 
ON TRANCE ( S A Z C I ~ ~ D H I ) ,  
34, 35. 
I 
NOW he describes retention :-Retention is Pr&$iy&rna. It means the keeping out of 
the air which has been expired, lengthening the duration of its stay outside, not drawing 
in all at once. 13y thus expiring and inspiring air the body becomes light, and the mind 
- 
thence attains 'the state of steadiness. The words ' let it be cultivated ' have been taken 
from the sense of the words 'causes mentlal steadiness, (sthibinibandhini) in the noxt 
aphorism. 
# 
Sfi~ra 35. 
Viyyavat3, of .the sense, of the objects of senses, bringing sense 
perceptions. m V$, or. m: Pravrittib, higher activity. a ~ n  
1Jtpann$, appear- 
ing. m: Manasab, of the mind, mental. M 
Sthiti, steadiness. - 
Niban- 
dhan9, causing. 
35. Or, Higher sense-ac tivi ty appearing, causes 
mental steadiness. 
Tllc power to cognize superpl~ysical (d iyya) si~~ell, 
which one gets 
I 
by concentrating upon the fore-part of the nose (the olfactory organ) 
I 
is the higher olfactory sense-activi ty. By conceli t.ration upon the fore- 
1 
part of the tongue, the power to cognize taste ; over the palate, cognition 
of colour ; in the middle of the tongue, cognition of touch; in tile root 
of the tongue, cognition of the sound. 
I 
The Higher sense-ac tivi ties appearing cause the steadiness of mind, 
destrov 
W doubt and become the entrance to that state of cognitive power 
which is called trance (Samhdhi). 
%h 
By this the Higher sense-activity, which is caused by concentrating 
upon the moon, the sun, the planets, jewels, the lamp and precious stones, 
&c,, is aiso to be uiicleratood to have that name. 

PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
Although whatever of the nature of an object is known by any 
science, by inference, or by the instruction of a teacher, is of course 
true, because they are capable of establishing the truth by teaching, 
yet, as long as even a portion is not known by one's own senses, erery- 
thing remains as it were unknown. The kncjwledge of such subtle mat- 
ters as the state of absolute freedom does rmt obtain firm ground in the 
mind. 
Therefore even if it yere for the purpose of giving fuller light 
to what has been learnt f ~ o m  
any science, by inference, or by the instruc- 
tion of a teacher, it is necessary that some particular object be perceived 
by one's self. When one portion of wlmt has been taught is perceived, 
the subtleet remaining portions are easily believed. It is for this very 
reason that mental embellisl~ment is taught ; so that when consciousness 
of power over the unrestrained mental modifications shows itself, tbe Yogi 
become8 capable of perceiving the objects of all such znodi fica tions. 
Aild mhen this happens, he gets faith, energy, memory and trance with- 
out any obstacle-35. 
I 
V~CHASPATI~B 
GLOSS. 
  he author now mentions another means of steadiness :-' Or, Higher sense-activity 
appearing, causes mental steadiness.' Explains :-g 
By concentration upon the fore-part of 
the nose, &ca' The power is acquired by the performance of concentration, contemplation 
and trance. !he cogkition of superphysical smell means that the smell lies revealed to his 
sense. In the otbr Higher sense-activities, also it should be understood in the same way. 
This is to be believed on authority, not by contact with one's self. 
Let it be so. But what is the use of these Higher ' sense-activities ? They do not 
help in the attainment of the state of absolute freedom. For this reason, he says :-These 
mental modifications appearing, in but a short time, incline the mind to steadiness either 
with reference to God, or with reference to discriminative knowledge. 
But the question i ~ ,  
how cah a mental modification having one object, become 
&eady with reference to other object also? For this reason, he says :--They destroy, i. e., 
they remove, doubts and for this very reason become the entrance to trance consciousness. 
Teachm that other modifications also which are taught by the Veda consist in Higher 
sense-activity :-' Bp this, &C.' 
Then the question arises, wherefore should there be doubt mtth reference to objects 
known by authority, &c. ? For this reason, he says :-' Alt#hough whatever ......... of course,. 
&C.' The root of Yoga is of course in faith. Arising from that, it reaches up to con- 
templation, &C., without obstacles. This is the meaning.-35. 
SGti-a 36. 
ViPokii, the painless state, the concentration on the painless. 
sr V&, 
or. d M  
Jyotismati, the bright, effulgent state, the state of lucidity, the con- 
centration on luminous o bjecte. 
36. Or, the state of painless lucidity. 

CH. 1. 
ON TRANCE @AMADHI), 36. 
83 
.I_ 
I 
~
W
~
~t wiw 
' Or, the state of .painless lucidity ' appe(~ring as 0 Higher Activity, 
causes the steadi7zess of the mind. These words (italicised) are to be 
taken from the previous aphorism. This is the consciousness oE thought- 
e 
forms, which comes to him who concentrates upon the lotus of the heart. 
The essence of the Will-to-know is shining in substance. It acts like 
the Ak&da (space, giving room to, or transforming easily into any form.) 
By diligent perseverance, in that, the Higher Activity appears, 
C _  
taking 
~pt~ionally 
the shapes of the lights of the sun, moon, planets and precious 
stones. 
Similarly the mirrd concentrating itself upon the notion of the 
'I am ' becomes like a waveless ocean calm, infinite, pure egoism. The 
following hae been said in this connection:- 
" Knowing that self, small as an atom, his consciousness manifests 
This two-fold Higher Activity, the painless sensuous and the Purely 
Egoistic, is called the lucidity. By this the Yogh mind reaches the 
state of steadiness.-36. 
V~~CHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Or, state of the painless lucidity.' 
Painless lucidity means that which is devoid of 
pain. The state of lucidity is t h e  light shining in thelotus of the heart. Let the mind 
be concentrated upon the lotus which is located between the chest and the abdomen. 
Lb 
has eight petals . and is placed with its face 'downwards. Its face has Brst to be turned 
upwards by the process of the expirative control of breath. In the middle thereof ir, 
the sphere of the sun, the place of waking consciousness, and is called A. 
Above thab 
ie the clphere of the moon, the place of dreaming consciousness, the U. 
Above that is the 
sphere of the are, the place of dreamless sleep, the M. 
Above that-is the Higher space, 
the &und of Brahma Itself, the fourth state of ultra-consciousness, which the knowem of 
Brahma call the half-measure (the ardha rntitrli). In the stalk thereof is the Artery of 
Brahma (the Brahmansdi), with its face upwards. This passes through the spheres of the 
sun, &c. Beginning above that, is the channel known as 6ugumr(B. That rune through 
the external spheres of the sun, &C., too. That is the place of the mind. Performing Wn- 
centration upon that, the Yogi obtains consciousness of thonght-lorma. 
He now shows the form of the mental essence with the reason thereof :--b The eser?nqe 
of the Will-to-be, &C.' 
By saying that it acts like the &bh, it is intenaed to be shown 
that it pervades all forms. The lights of the sun. &C., appear am different form8 ; and that 
putting on different forms optionally, appear as such (forms). The text understands h- 
by the word Will-to-be, tahe mind and not the Bt?ahitta&a ; and it 
intended to &te ham 

64 
PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
that the mindh of the shape of light appearing as such from its position in the Suqumn& 
channel, inasmuch as it takes its birth from the VaikOrika (the esselrtinl siittvic) form'of 
the principle of Individuality (AhaiikBra), and is therefore full of the essence thereof. ILs 
possession of the quality of pervasion too is established by its act ion upon various objects. 
Having spoken of concentration upon the mind, which is evolved out of the principle 
of Individuality (Asmitb, t h e  bads of th6 ' I am '), now he describes the nature of the con- 
centration upon the principle of Individnality or egoism :-8imilarly, 
&c. 
' Calm' means that which is free from the waves of disturbing energy (rajas) and 
inertia (tarnas). 
Infinite means all-pervading. 
'Pure Egoism ' signifies that which does not show more colours than one. 
He st~pports his theory by another's aitthority :-The 
following has been said in this 
connection, by PaiichaiikhB. 
"Small as an atom,' because it is difficult to know 
' That self,' which is the basis of the principle of Individuality. 
' Knowing' means having pondered upon it and having come to know only this much, 
'1 am. 
f
'
 
Well then the lucidity might appear as various forms of light ; but how can it be 
pure egoism only ? In answer t o  this,'he says :-6 
This two-fold, &C.' 
The moaning is that 
the principle of Individuality remains essential light itself when the dirt of disturbing 
energy (rajas) and inertia (tarnas) has been washed away. 
He describes the result of both form of lucidity :-' By this, &c!--86. 
SCltra 37. 
rFrnn VPta-rtiga, one' who is desireless. h 
Visaya, an object. 
g
'
Vltariigavipyarn, having the desireless for its object. 
W V&, or. 
Chittarn, 
the mind. 
/, 
37. Or, the mind having the desireless, for its obje.ct. 
pi mm & 11 39 11 
VYASA. 
The mind of the YogP tinged by the d o u r  of the mind of the de- 
sireless, which it takes up for study, reaches the position of steadinem-37. 
VBCHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
The desireless are such personages as Dvaipbyayi and others, their minds become t h e  
abjects of concentration, and the colour thereof is imparted to the mind of the Yogi.-37. 
Svapna, of dream. et h'idril, of deep sleep, sleeps. 
Jnhna, the 
knowledge atudy. m 
Alambanm, taking for its objects, resorting to, media 
tating on. 31 V&, or. 
I 38. Or, having the knowledge of dream and deep 
as its object of study. 
y 
, 
\ 
% 

CB; 
f .  
ON PRANCE @AMADHI), 
38, 39, 40. 
65 
0 
VYASA* 
Bv 
U makil~g ihe knowledge oE cli~earras a.ndS the itnowledge of sleep 
,, 
an 
object of studyv, tlle inind' of the Yogi dctwmines towards the shzipe and 
attai 11s the position of stead ioess.- 38. 
-t 
V ~ C H A S P A T ~ S  
GLOSS 
Wlen tho time comes that this Yogi, in his dream state, worships the Lord ~ a h e &  
wara's form, enrapturing the mind by its beauty, placed in a secluded spot of some lonely 
forest, appcaring as if arisii~g out of the sphere of the ligllt of the moon, tho Iimbs large 
and ernall of the shape appearing as soft a s  the stalks of the lotus, the form seen as if made 
of shining moon-stotlss, encirelcd with garlauds of sweet-stllelling ill:ilatli and Mallikii; 
then on awakening he is full of elation, and thcn remembering the SW 
form which was 
the object of dream consciousness, his .mind determines towards the unity of that one 
form and attains the position of steadiness. 
The sleep to be utlderstood here is the one in which the 1igh.t of the quality of 
eseeutiality appears. (This is the siittvic sleep). It is the same, on awakening frohl 
which the remcmbranco is, '1 have slept plsssorably.' This explains that the mind in 
thatdate becomes one-pointed. It is this that the knowers of ~rahma* 
define to be of 
the nature of Brahmr (Brahm:m Bpa). 
P' 
In the dresm gtzto it is not possible to bring mere knowledge without an object, 
within the range ; therefore, the object also is brought 
t h e  range.--38. 
m-% Yathb, abhimata, according to one's own choice, or what appeals 
one, accordiug to one's predilection. 
~mn, Dhybnbt, by meditating on, 
V&, 
or. 
, 
33. Or, by meditating according to one's predilection. 
Let him medi ta.t.e upon whatever he wishes. 
Becoming steady in 
tllat instance, it reaches the position of steadiness in other matters also.- 
39. 
'VA CHASPATI'S G LOSS. 
What more ? Whatever is desired by one, the same has the form of his deity.--39. 
Sutra 40. 
- 
5 T ~ * ~ F 4  $PRKK: 
I1 Oo II 
w m ~  
Parmbpu, the .minutest atom. 
Parama, greatest. m: Mahattva, 
infinity. m: Ant& end. 
W~MP-: 
Reaching down to the minutest and 
up to the largest. W A s p ,  of this Yogi. m: 
~ a d i k h h ,  
power. 

40. His power reaches down to the minutest, and 
up to the largest. 
~ m ~ - t l l i ? i t ~ a  
I 
RfSnmm ~WW- 
Entering illt'o tile subtle it attains the position of steadiness upon the 
~~nallest 
of the snmll, clown to an atonl. Enterinn 
D iuto the large, the 
His great power consists in not being turned back by any check while 
running along both these liaes. The mind of the Yogi, full O S  &is power, 
' does not ag:~in stand in need of the mental embeliishi~eut due to habitual 
He shows how t,he nature of the self is to be reached as a point of steady concentra- 
tion:--'His 
power rcaches down to the minutest and up to the largest.' Explains :- 
Entering into the subtle, &c,' 
Summarizing what hw already been said, he describes the connotation of the word 
power.' 
While running along, &C.' 
Now describes a subsidiary result of the power. 
Bull 
of this power, &C.' 
Thus the means of obtaining mental steadiness hove been 
too obtained by the steady mind has been shown.--60. 
S W a  41. 
described. The power 
6b K$aa, disappearing, powerless. fi Vyitti, modification of the mitld. 
M: 
T<&a Vritteb, of that (mind) whose modificahions have become powerless, 
have disappeared. ~
h
f
q
 
AbhijBtasya, of a transparent. ~q Iva, like. +I: 11,1a~eh, 
of a crystal. @h Grclhitri, the knower. m G~allana, kljowing, m Cr&hun, 
J 
the knowable all these three. 
Tat-stha, remaining in it, what is presented 
to it, 
Tad anjanatb, taking the tinge of that object, being coloured by 
that object, the power of appearing iu the sllapo of m y  object. &: 
rSarn&- 
the power of thou&-transformation, 
col~ccntration and oneness. 
41. Becoming like a transparent crystal on the modi- 
fica.tions clisappesriug, (the mind acyuires) the power of 
1.3 
thought-transformation (samal~atti), the power of appearing 
in the shape of whatever object is presented to it, be it tile 

CH. 1. , 
ON TRANCE (SAMADRT), 41. 
67 
\ 
- 
vyba. 
'
.
 
C - 
Kow what is the nature of the power of thougJ:ht-transformation 
which the mind acquires, when it has thus obtained rest ? This is des- 
t 
cribed:-- Becoming like a transparent crystal or1 the modifications 
disappearing, the mind acquires the power of thought-transformatkm,- 
the power of appearing 
C in the shape of whatever is presented to it, be it 
the knower, the knowable, or the act of knowing.' 
P 
' On the modifications disappearing ':-When 
the notions are at rest, 
(not in active work). 
' Like a transparant crystal ':-This 
is the statemerit of an analogy. 
As the crystal becomes coloured by the colour of the object placed beside 
C 
it, and then shines according to the form of the object, so the mind is 
coloured by the colour of the object presented to it and then appears in 
the form of the object. 
Colowed by subtle elements placed in contact, it becomes of the 
nature of .the subtle elements and shiues out i n  the shape of the subtle 
elements. 
Similarly, coloored bv 
c/ the distinctions of the world coming into 
contact' with it, ,it becomes of the' nature of those distinctions, and 
shines out in the form of the worl'd. 
\ 
Similarly, is this to be uhderstood in the case of the acts of knowing, 
i.e., the powers of sensation. Coloured by the acts of knowing taken as 
objects of thought, it becomes of the nature of the acts of knowing, and 
shioes o n t  in forms which show the nature of the acts of knowing. 

68 
PATANJALI'S POCA. 
-. 
Similarly, coloured by the enjoying Pnrufia, taken as the ohject of 
thoright, it puts on the nature of the enjoying Purusa, and d~ines 
out 
i n  the form which shows the nature of the enjoying Purnsa. 
Similarly, coloured by the released Purusa taken as object of 
thought, it becomes of the nature of the released Purusa, and shines 
out in the form which shams the nature of the released Purup. 
This tben i s  Sarnlpatti, tl~ough 
t-transformation,-the 
mind sbowi ng 
itself like a transparent crystal, in the f&m of the object it comes in 
con tact with, bo it the kn~wer, the knowable, or the acts of kri!ndetlge. 
V ~ ~ C H A ~ P A T ~ * S  
GLOSS. 
Now the qrlestion is wbat is the nature and what are the objects of the Cognitive 
I 
trance, when the mind has thus 05tained rest ? The Commentator introdnces the next 
aphorism :-U 
This is described, &c? 
Reads the aplmrism : -' Becoming like a trans 
parent arystal, &C.' lxplains it :-The words, ' when the notions are at rest,' describe 
the mind as existing in the state, in which that class of mental modifications which 
1 
have their origin in the gnalities of disturbing energy and inertia (rajas and tarnas) 
have been destroyed by hsbilual practice and desirelessness. By this it is meant to 
be explained that Mental Essence (sattva) being by nature pure,, is not overpowered 
at the time, by disturbing energy (rajas) and inertia (tarnas). 
He explains tbe analogy :-' As the crystal, &C.' 
'The object placed beside it ' is the upldhi, the attributive substance such as the 
Japfi flower, $0. 
'Coloured by proximity,' taking up the light thereof. 
The form of $he object placed beside, 'is the red, blue or other colour of its own.' 
Shines ouf means, 'shourj: the qualities of! that form.' 
He applies the analogy :--'8?.tOilarly, colot~red by the object, &C.' 
The object of k~owledge (grghya) is the same to which the mind is at the time 
turned (ttlambana?. It is coloured thereby when t h e  object passes into it. Thus is the 
knowable distinguished from the knower and the act of linowing. 
'Becomes of the naknre of the object,' means, & a s  if it has put on the qualityof 
knowability having thus covered up its own mental form. For this mason shines out in 
the form of the howable object itlself.' 
The subtle and the gross 'are colours from the objective world only. The commed- 
tator divides them thcrefom into two :-' CoIo~red by t h e  subtle, &C.' 
The distinctions 
of the world consist in its being self-conscions and not self-conscious, and 
the 
differences of objects, such as the animals, cows, etc., and the mineral substances, such as 
the jar, etc. By this the two trances which are accompanied by philosophical curiosity 
and meditation are shown. 
Bimilar is the case with the acts, the means of knowledge, the powers of sensa- 
tion (indriyas). They are SO called hxause knowledge is obtained through their instm- 
mentality. 
The commentatofi r%!Iders the same plainer :-' Coloured by the acts of knowledge, 
&a.' 
Being an act of knowledge, but taken as an object of knowledge, it is here men- 
tioned as having both these qualities at the same time. 
' Coloured by that,% e., pierced through and through by that, and having oovered up 
its own mental form it appears as (if it ;were t h e  means, the external instrument lof 
knowledge. 

CR. I. 
ON TRANCE (SAMADBT), 41, 42. 
69 
By this has been described the Cognitive trance which is accompanied by elation. 
The one which is accompanied by egoism is now alltded to. ' Coioured by the Enjoy- 
ing Purusa, &C.' 
The Enjoying Purup means, he in whom the notion of the '1 am' 
resides. 
Because the quality of being a Purya is common to the released Purusa, sach 
as 
slid Yrrhllda too, they too have to be taken here as objects of trance. For 
this reason, the commontator says :-' Similarly, coloured by the released Purup, &C.' 
Coming to the end, he explail~s the words Vastha tadsfi jnatiit,' appearing in the - 
form of the object it comes into contact with. 
The thought-transformation called the Cognitive Trance consists in t h e  assumption 
by the Mental Essence of the forms of the knower, the knowable and the act of knowledge, 
I 
and the consequent showing of i Lsdf in the s h p e  of the phenomenon which lias entered 
therein, when the dirt of the ntjm and the tnmns has been removed by the illcreased 
power of aontemplatio~~, 
ancl when it is directed towards, i. e., fixed upon, these objects 
8 
of Irnowlcdge. 
Here the order of the reading of t h e  words, ' the knower, the act of knowledge md 
the howable,' in the aphorism is not to 
regarded. because it is contrary 
the 
natural successio~l of the  object^ of l-nowlcd6.c. 
lnilerly in the Cornroei~tary too tile 
meationitrg of the subtJe elements first in order? is not to be regarded. All js thus 
C - 
beautiful.-$1. 
SOtra 42. 
1 
m, Tatra, there, W Sabda, of words. iad, Arthn, of meaning m, JfiFGna, of 
idea. t%sia:,V'iknlpnih, with options. e t ,  SafikPrpn, mixed up. , 
Ssvi- 
tnrka, indistinct. &: 
Samdpntth, the tllought 
- 
tmnsformn-tion. 
42. There, tlhe thought-transform ation in which the 
options of word, meaninc~ 
3 and iclea are mixed up, is 
called In distinct, (verbal). 
s-hqm: 
a h d  ;~~~muFir: 
I 
htt-? 
WmPif WPa m;rhi$wrik W - ~ F T T J T R  & 
I m 
VYBSA. 
r l 
Anil that as foll~nvs :- llw corn as a word, the cow as an object and 
tile cow as an idea, although diflerent from one another, are cogriized 
n~ indistinct. 
Beiilg analyzed, the characteri;.;tica oE the mord are differ- 
ent ; ant1 tile ci~nrac~eristics 
of an idea are tlilforent ; and the characteristice 

of an object too are diffc rent. Thns their lines of existence are distinct. 
' There,' arnong the various descriptions of thonght-transfortnation, if an 
object such as a cow, ig present in the trance-consciousness of the YogZ, 
who has reached this state of though t-transformation, 
4 
being pierced 
. 
through 
- 
by the indeter1ninat.e notions of word, meaning and idea, then the 
thought-transformation is mixed up and is called Indistinct. 
When, however, the mind becomes free from the memories of verbal 
convention, and the trance-consciousness is devoid of the options of in- 
ferential a d  verbal cognitions, the object makes its appearance in the 
mind in its own distinct nature (nrlrnixed up mi t11 word and meaning), 
the though t-transformation is callcd Distinct (ni.rvitarka). 
Thjs is Hig1;her 
Perception. 
This f n I-ther becomes the seed of verbal and i nferen tin1 
lcnowledge. Verbal and inferential knowledge are born therefl-om. 
It does not go along with verhal and inferential knowledge. Hence the 
knowledge obtained by a YogZ through the stage 
- of trance, called Distinct 
thought-transformation, is not confused by any other cognition.-42. 
Thonght-tmnsformation in general has been described. By subsidiary classifier- 
tion it is four-fold. Thus : Indistinct or verbal, Distinct or wordless, Meditative and 
Ultra-meditative. Out of these the description of the Indistinct t h ~ ~ g h t - t r a ~ ~
is given :-' There, B i d  Ont of these though t-transformations the Indistinct thought- 
transformation is to be known. How? The notion of word, meaning ' and idea consists 
in this. The faculty of imagination (vikalpa) raises distinctions in the same thing and 
shows sameness in different thingss. Thus the word, meaning and idea are confused together, 
dthough in reality they are different from ono another. Therefore is this thonght-trans- 
formation confused, i. e.,'mixed 11p with the notions of word, meaning and idea :-' And that 
as fonows. The word COW, &C.' The flrst phrase,' the word cow' shows the unreal cogni- 
tion of the word being fancied as confused with meaning and idea. 
The second phrase, ' the meaning COW,' shows the notion of indistinctness from the 
meaning, when word and idea are taken in. 
The third phrase, ' the cow as an idea' shows the notion of indistinctness from the 
idea when word and meaning are taken in. It is in this way that the world is seen taking 
in these three without making m y  distinction among them, although in reality they are 
all disf inet from one mother. 
Well, but if they are taken in as not distinct from one another, whence does the 
distinction come in ? For this reason, the commentator says:-'' 
Analyzed, &c? 
Being 
examined by philosophers in accordance with the canons of agreement and difference, 
the characteristics of a word are found to be, that it is a modification of sound only, and 
that it possesses the qualifications of intensity, &c. The characteristics of the object 
are different, 'being absence of intelligence and- form, &c. The characteristics of an idea 
are different, such as illumination and the absence of fixity in form, &o. 
Therefore their 
lines of existence are different, the lines, that is to say, along which their natural 
distinctions show themselves. 
When the Yogi is in the state of thought-transformation with reference to ' this cow, 
&C., taken in optionally, &G.' 
This describes the Yogi's lower perception (the ordinary 

ON TRANCE (SAMADHT), 42, 
H 43. 
perception). The rest is e&y. 
To connect this with the next aphorism he first describes 
the Distinct Thought-transformation :-L 
When however, &C.' 
~ i e e d o m  
from memories, &C., means their absence. Verbal and inferential cognitions 
become possible only when preceded by the memory of verbal conventions. Convention 
consists in the mutual super-imposition of word, meaning and idea, in the phrase, 'This 
is s cow.' 
By these become possible the real aud imaginative cognitio~~s, 
traditional 
teaching and inference. For this reason thc trance conscioasness preccded by these is 
Indistinct, 
0 
Wbon, however, the mind is full of the object only and favollring the object.onIy, 
constatltly h~bituates itself to the cognition of the object alone, the memory of the con- 
vention does no lollger illter£ore and is therefore given up. Further the options of verbal 
and inferential cognitions too, in which it has its origin, are also given up. Then in tbe 
trance-consciousness, void of these descriptions of knowledge, the object takes its place 
in its owl1 distinct nature, alld the tnind is confined to the manifestation of the nature, 
of the ollject alone. ~t does not show any of the mixed UP percel~ts of the word and the' 
idea, This is the Distinct Thought-transformation. 
That is the Higher Perception 
of the Yogis, becanso there is not in this, even a, trace of untrue knowledge, the unreal - 
fastening thereupon of other notions. 
Well let this be. The Yogis lay down and teach the truths which they have learnt 
by Higher Perception. And how do they do that, but by promulgating and teaching t h e  
truths by meails of tne processes of verbal and inferential knowledge resorted to for the 
sake of others. Hence verbal and inferential knowledge have the Higher Perceptive 
knowledge for their object. And verbal and inferential kllowledge are subject to the inter- 
ference of ir,n aginatio (vikalpa). For this mason the Higher Perception also is but a 
modification of imagination. 
- 
Therefore he says:-' 
That is the seed of verbal and inferential knowledge.' 
If Higher 
Perception went along with verbal and inferential knowledge in the same way as is the 
case with Indistinct thought-transformation, i. e., if the perception were confused on 
account of the percepts being mixed up, then i t  would be a modification of imagination 
only. This, however, is their seed. Verbal and inferential knowledge are born therefrom; 
. 
and it is not possible that the cause of a thing may also be the sphere of its manifesta- 
tion and be CO-extellsive with it. It is not that the fire lives in smoke, because the 
knowledge of the existence of smoke becomes the cause of the knowledge of the existence 
of fire. Therefore, the Yogis take in objects by non-fictitious (real and distinct) perception, 
and only teach it and promulgate it by means subject to Action (mixing up, confusion). 
Summarizes :-' Ror this reason, &c. ' 
Sutra :43. 
. h  
~$3, Smriti of memory. W, Paririuddhau, on the purification, or cew 
sation. m, Svarapa, its own nature. p, 
&inyb, devoid of, qq, 
Iva, as it were. 
iab, hrtha, as the object. m, Mbtra, alone. fi*, 
Nirbhbsa, slliuing. 
f;Efad 
Nirvitarkti, distinctive (wordless). 
43. ljistinctive (wordless) thought-transformation is 
that in which the mind shines out as the object alone 
on the cessation of memory, and is as it were devoid of 
its own nature. 

and inferelltial knowledge, ceases ; when the mind is coloured by tile 
~~d so it has been explained. - 
The object itself is but a single output of the eRort of that (tl~ought- 
trmsfonnati6rt of the mind). 
is a 
arrangement of the subtle elements. It is a generic quality 
other chnracteristics, such as those of the ha1 f-jar, &C., arise, it d isq- 
pears. This elm-acteris t ic is called tile snbst ientum (the i nd cpendent 
Whole, the avayavi). it is this substratum wlvllich is spoken of ss being 
one, or large, or small, or tangible, or possessing the quality of zction or 
transitory. 
To him, however, who does not believe this particular collection to 
be an independent reality - and for whom the subtle cause does not admit 
of perception, there ie of course no substdtum ; and therefore nearly all 

CH. T. 
ON TRANCE (SAM&JRI), 43. 
knowledge is false, being untrue knowledge and not possessing the form 
of the real. 
And then what cvould Real Cognition be, when there was no 
real object ? Hence there is a eubstratum (iudepeuden t of the consti- 
tuent parts) whicll being spoken of as being large, &C., is the object of 
1)istinctive Thought-transformation. -43. 
-~,T~~cHAsPATI'S 
GLOSS. 
Connects the aphorism to he explained:-'The 
description of this Distinctive 
Thought-transformation, &c. ' 
It is Distinct, &Q. ':--this is the aphorism. Imagination affects the knowledge of 
word-convention, verbal sud infereritial cognitions only. Cessation of the memory born 
therefrom, is spoken of here. 
Here, the ressati~\n of the memory of the convention is the cause. The cessation 
of t h e  memory of the v e ~ b a l  atxl inferential cognitions is caused thereby. The words 
' inferential cognition, ' denote here t h e  thing to be inferred by mean8 of t h e  process of 
induction. The words as i t  were ' used in the text after ' own n a h r e  ' are to he taken 
as qualifyicg fhe words given up. 9 
He refutes the colltrary theories about the object of (this thought-transformation):- 
" The object itself is but a single, &G." 
' A single output of the mind, ' 'consists in what 
puts out the meutal act but singly. This means that the atoms which go to make up an 
object being naturally many are not the objects of the Distinctive Thought-t,ransformation, 
The reason is that although 
S 
the atom may otherwise well be the object of this thought- 
transformation, it cannot be SO 
011 account of its estreae subtdety, arid because many of 
them being joined together to make a siugle whole large object, each cannot singly shine 
out in the mind ancl make as such a single notion. 
If so, why then it may he supposed that really existing atoms possess t h e  character- 
istic of shining out in the mind by virtue ol enisbing as derivative qualities of &he single 
whole, i. e., by showing out (what might be oallcd a) derivalive grossness. For this 
I 
reason, he says : 'The object itself (i.e., not the constit.uent parts).' The meaning is that 
the grossness of an object being provable by porce~~tion, 
is impossible to eonceal in the 
absence of any defect. 
T@ those who say that t h e  objects cow, &C., and jar, &C., are formed by the successive 
formations of diatoms, &ce, he says th rt these objects consist, each in its own nature, of 
different collections of atoms. ' 
A collection of afolns is a rnodifioation showing a gross form, and i t  differs from an- 
other such moili5cation. Each particular modification of oollwtivity is of the very nature 
of the object, its own form. The description allplies equally whether it be an object such 
as a cow which is capable of enjoying, or, an object such as a jar which is capable of being 
enjoyed. 
tlolll these classes of objects fall within the conl~otatioii of the word ' wcrld' 
(loka, that which is visible). 
Now the qaestion ariscs : Is this collection appearing as a gross form different from 
the subtle otolns, or, is it the same nit11 them ? 
i f  dilfcrcnt, how could they live in it as 
such and how could it have that form ? B jar is different from a cloth. A jar cannotthere- 
fore take the form of a cloth ; nor can the qualities which go to make a jar, live in a cloth. 
If, on the other hand, Ghe whole in its collective firm wcre the same with the parts 
(the atoms), it would likewise be subtle ard independent (asirdhtirana). 
For this reusoli, 11c says:-' 
bhch of these collections is a particular arrangement, &c. 
9 
I 
This is the meaning. A jar and other such i)hjects are not entirely different from atomi ; 
nor are they entirely of t h e  same nature. 111 t h e  cnsc of their being like the horso and 

the cow, the existence of the relation of the characteristic end the characterized could 
not be predicated. If, however, they were not different they would be of the nature of the 
characterized object itself, and this is not proper. Henco the substratum (the characterized 
object, the Whole) should be considered to be in some respects different and in others 
eimilar to its constituent parts, the subtle atoms. In this way everything becomes proper. 
By placing the words ' subtle elements ' in the genetive case, he shows partial differ- 
ence ; and the words, ' constitutes the very nature of the object,' &C., show the absence of 
difference. 
'It is inferred by its visible effect' :-' Visible effect ' means its perception as such 
and its being dealt with as snch. 
' It has the form of its cause ' :-This 
is intended to show that in so far -as it; is not 
different from itaxause, i t  is in the nature- of things that it should possess the form of the 
. 
canse. 
Is this characteristic which is of the nature of the characterized object itself, yer- 
manent? -The commentator answers in the negative :-''when 
other oharacteristics 
such as those of the half-jar appear, &c. " 
Now he shows thab the form of the characterized object, the whole as such, is dider- 
ent from the atoms :-' This characteristic is called the substratum, &c! 
The meaning is 
that its function is the pcssessioii of qualities like the sweetness of water, La., which are 
quite dikrent from the functions to be performed by atoms. 
It is not only by inference that the inclepe~dent existence of a suhtratum (the 
nuayavi, the Whole as such) is established ; but by the fact as well of the whole world 
treating it as such, inasmuch as the business of the worla depends upon that. Bor this 
=on, 
he says :-L 
By this, &c. ' 
Well, but the mental conception of the percept a s  an individual existence indepen- 
dent of its parts, may only avail if there is no contradiction. There ia, however, contra- 
diction. Thus, whatever exists has no parts, such as consciousne.ss (vi j Bina); and the 
cow and the jar, &C., do exist. This is a reason taken from t h e  very nature of the things. 
Existence is qualified by the absence of the touch of such charactxxistics as are contra- 
dictory thereof. It is contradicted by the tmch of contradictory qualities. 
The touch of contradictory qualities being found in an objeot possessed of parts, 
contradicts the pervading quality (excludes the middle term). It, therefore, disproves 
even the existencc of the object. 
In the snbstratlum there exists the touch of contradictory characteristics, snch as 
occupying the same space or not occupying the same space, not being covered or nn- 
covered, rcdness and not-redness, movability and im!novability, &c. 
For this reason, he says :-' To him however, &c. ' This is the meaning. The proof 
of the existencc by perception is given as the reason. But the pole perceived as a limb 
of a bedstead may also become the pole of a plough, or something else different from what 
e 
it has been proved to be by perception. As to its becoming something else, that is no 
reason, because the something clse is not so proved. 
As to the existence of the jar, &C., 
being proved by perception, why this existoncc consists of the capacity of performing 
certain functions ; and that capacity is not different f r o d  grossness (sthitlattva). The 
reasoning which does away with grossness, dces away with the nature of the thing itself. 
But the objection may still arise that the grossness of a thing is not its esistence 
itself. Existence is the absence of non-existence. Grossness * is t h e  absence of non- 
grossness. The absences differ on account of the difference of the objects whose absences 
are contcmplatecl. Therefore eristellce is not dcs troyed, own though grossness may 

CB. I. 
OX TRANCE (SAMADHI), 43. 
be abseab, bbcanse the two are different. Or, it might be said that there is difference 
h the objects to be determined on account of the difference of their absences. 
If 
with a view to determine the nature of the object of perception, which being true 
cognition and free from the taint of imagination, y recedes the determination of the 
natulr, of the object as such, you say that it is made up of the visible atorns,'being inces- 
santly born without there being any interval between them, and without their having 
put on the nature of extreme subtlety ; then, it is to be noted that the atoms of odour, 
1 
taste and touch fall into the intervals of the visual atloms and that they do not exist 
without them. 
Besides, the notion of a grove, as a single whole, comes into the mind, because the 
intervals among the trees thereof is not perceived, (although it does exist). The theory, 
therefore, which speaks of the atoms as being visible and gross in themselves and as 
having no intervals, is false. Eow c m  tho fancies based upon such a theory have any- 
thing to do with the realities of things, even on the strength of the conception of a 
oausal c h i u  (pbramparya) ? Bo W can it be accepted as establishiug the natBre of the 
existence to the effect that they do not exist as parts but are wholos theo~selves. 
Therefore he who believes in the authority of perception free from the taint of fancy, 
must grant that grossness. itself, being as it ie tile object of euch perception, does exist 
as such. This is determined for certain withont the taint of fancy, and mush be 
admitted even by one who has no clesire left for such things. And further, if existence 8s 
such were to contradict and thus exclude grossness, why, it would exclode itself 
too as a mcessnry conseqnence. 
The very highly subtle atohs have, therefore, their it~tervals Alled u p  with atoms 
of another class, and the theory of their being t h e  objects of perception is shorn 
of admissibility. This is meant by saying, ' To him, however, who does not believe 
this particular ,.collection to be an independent 
reality, &C.' But the particular 
collection although independsiitly existing is still the object of certain (nirvikalpa) 
% 
percep tiou. 
Well then, t h e  subtle atoms may be the objects of certain perception. Ror this 
reason, he says :-L 
And the subtle object does not admit of perception,! .perception here 
means that which is free from the taint of imagination, is certain. 
To him who has such a chief,' there is of course no substratum ancl for this reasons 
all knowledge is false, being defined as it is " to be untrue knowledge, not possessing the 
form thereof." 
The knowledge, that is to say, which has grossness for its object, and that 
again on which this rests, the knowledge of existence, is all false to him. 
Well, even go, the knowledge of self would not be unbrue, inasmuch as the self does 
not exist as a whole consisting of parts. How then should it be said that all knowledge 
would bocowe false ? For this reason, he says :--" Nearly all knowledge." 
The qnestion now arises, IVhat even if it were so ? ' In answer he says :--'And then 
what would Right Cognitions be, he.' 
If t h e  knowledge of existence (sattva), &C., be 
false then the knowledge of things which have their origin in Sattva, &C., such as the 
knowledge of there being no substntom, indepmdent of parts, must also be.false. For 
what is the object of this knowledge bnt the grossness which is the object of certain 
perception ? And inasmuch as this grossness does not exist, its knomledge would certainly 
be false. But how is it that the object itself does not as such exist? J?or this reason, 
he says :-" Whatever is perceived, &C." 
As to contradiction (virodha) t h a t  is to be explained in accordance with the afore- 
said method of knowledge, by meens of the variety of modifications, and by diflerencia- 
tion and non-differentiation. Thus a11 is beautliful,--43. 

m, Etay$, tg thia. m, Eva, also. 
Savich$r$, this meditative. W- 
Nirvichbra, the ultrameditative. v, Cha, and. w 1 b w 1  
e% 
SC;k~m!ms-oipyb, 
having the 
subtle for their or its objecte. 
~ r e a ~ i  
Vghkhyiita, are described- 
44. By this the meditative and the ultra-medita- 
tive, having th.e subtle for 
their 
objects, are a l ~ o  
described. 
Of these the thought-transfor~nati on ii: to subtlle element is called 
Meditative, when their charactei-istics are in manifestation and when- the 
limitations of cousciousuess in space, time and operative cause are present. 
In this state too the subtle element comes into the trance-.consciousness 
as qualified onl y hy the present clmracteristics ; and is taken in only ,by 
a single effort of consciousness ; . and it is this much alone of an object 
that comes ill to contact. w i tll the facul ty of Meditative Thought- 
transformation. 
That, however, is the ultra-meditative thought-tmnsfortnation, which 
operates with reference to subtle objects unlimited i n  all ways, all round 
by the past, the present and the unpredicable characteristics, but running 
after all the characteristics possessing as they do in fact a nature common 
to all of them. This in fact is the nature of the subtle element. It pre- 
sents itself to the trance-conr3ciousness as such and colours it similarly by 
contact,. As to the cognition it is called ultra-meditative, when it becomes 
the ol~ject itself, and thus as it were, becomes void of its own nature. 
Of these the Indistinctive and Distinctive t,h~ught-trax~sformations 
have to operate upon t h i n 3  extended in time and spare ; the Meditative 
and the U1 tra-meditatiw operate upon the subtle elements. 
It is thug 

CH. I. 
that; the absence ot uncertainty in both these is described by the descrip 
tion of the Intlistinctive alone.-44. 
VACIIABPATI'S GLOSFS. 
Those bhat have manifested the characteristics of the jar, Lc., are said to ' have their 
characteristics in manifestation.' It means those that have already taken up the charac- 
teristics of the jar, &c. 
@ 
Sprco is indiczted by above, below and the directions, BC. Time here is the present. - 
'Operative cause': The earthly atom is born from the flve classes of ultimate atome 
(tanrngtras), with s prevalence of the odoriferous minima. Similarly t h ~  
liquid atom 
(spas tattva) is born from the four classes of ultimate atoms except the odoriferous 
minima, with the prevalence of t h e  gustiferous minima. Similarly, t h e  fiery atom is made 
of the three minima besides the odoriferous and the gustiferous minima, with a prevalence 
of the luminiferous minims. Similarly, the gaseous atom is horn from the tangiferous 
a~ld soniferous minima without an admixture of the other three classes of minima, with a 
prevalence of tllo tangiferous minima. Similarly, the birth of k l 8 a  is from the one 
class of soniferous minima done. This is t h e  operative cause of the subtle elements. 
The subtle elements in this state are qualified by t h e  limitations of space, time 
their causes such as those specified. lt mans tbat, being limited by the consciousne~ 
of time, space and causes a s  they are, the cognition of t.lmse qualified objects is not in- 
dependent of the cognition of their qualities. 
The question is, what is the si~nilarity of the Indistinctive to the Meditative Thought- 
transformation? For this reason, he says :-' Burther in that state, &C.' 
The earthy atom 
receives its individuality from the five classes of ultimate atoms (tanmiitras) grouping 
together and is take11 in ily a slnglu effort. of conscious~less as a siugle whole. &milarly 
are t h e  liquid atoms, &C., to be understood 
coming into consciousness as single sub- 
stances, receiving as they do their indiviiluality by grouphgs of three, two and m e  class 
of ultimate atom (tanmptras) respectively. 
The present characteristic is that which at is present rising. By saying that 'it is 
qualified only by the present cllaracteristics,' i t i s  indicated that in this state of consciousT 
ness are present along with the object the optional operations of the memory of conven- 
tion and of verbal and inferential cognitions. Perception, while it cognizes the gross state, 
does not reveal the atoms. They' are revealed by verbal and inferential cognitione. 
Hence it is proper that i t  (the Meditative Thought-transformation) should be mixed up 
with the operations of verbal and inferential cognitions. 
Now explains the Ultra-meditative :--' That however, eto.' 
' In all ways ' means in all modes of manifestation, as blue, yellow, &c. A11 round 
means by the consciousness of 011 the conditions of time, space, and causation. Ry de- 
scribing them thus, it is shown that the atoms are not limited by time. Further, he says 
that they are neither limited Ly the characteristics which are brought into operation 
by time :-' Unlimited by tho past characteristic, i. e., those which have had their opera- 
tion ; by rising characteristics, i.e., those that are to be found in the present ; by the 
unpredicable oharacteristics, i.e., the future ones. 
The question arises that if the atoms are not conditioned by any of these character- 
istics, are they then quite fortuitous ? For this reason he says :--' but running after all the 
ctharacteristics.' By what connection then do the atome run after the characteristics 1 
For this reason, he says :--' Possessing as they do in fact a nature common to all the charac- 
teristics.' 
The meaning is that characteristics differ in some respects from, and ale 
identical in other8 to, the atoms. 
I 

~.'ATA~'JALL'S 
YOGA. 
Now he says why this thought-transformation has this nature of the atoms as its 
o5ject :-This in fact is the natnre of the subtle element ! The 
which gives tho 
knowledge of reality does not operate upon the unreal. 
Having described tho object of that state of ~ansciousness, now ho describes its 
nature :- As to the cognition, &C.' 
Summarising he makes r statement which shows the differences of their nrtures- 
' Of these, &c,' Finishes :-' It is thus, &C.' 
In both these :-in itself and the nl tra-meditative.-44. 
F SBk~ma, of the subtle. m,, 
Visayatvam, province both mean the 
quality of having the subtle for its object. 
Cha and. 
im A, up to. 
Lit@, 
the nouinenal. 
6wmq ParyavaaPnatn, encliilg, extremity. 
Reaching 
up to the noumenal. 
45. Apd the province ~f the subtle reaches up to 
the nournend\ 
II 
-11 
8 %  
V Y ~ S A .  
'.file oclorifr~ms et.l~er (garrdha t1anmAti-a) is the subtle object in 
relation to the atoms of the earthly class iprithvi) ; the gnstiferiou~ (ram 
tammltxa) to the licpid (ipast atcjm ; the l umnifel*ons e tl~er (rGpa tanmbtrrr) 
of the fiery (taijas) atom ; the tangiferous ether (spadn tanrnstra) of the 
gafieous 
(vfiyn) atom ; the ssniferous ether (dabda tanmitra) of 
the 
&&&c 
atom. Of these the principle of indivitluality (ahahkbra) is the 
subtler cause. S~tbt 
ler than this too is the p~~i-elr 
U Phenomenal Objec- 
t ive Existeilce. Thc principal subtler tlran this too is the Nou~uenal 
(A li hga). There is nothing subtler t'han the Nonmenal. 
But it might be said that there is the Puruga who is also iiobtle. 
the purely yhenolnen:d, fiuch is not the subt.letg of the Purugn. On the 
other I~antl, tbhe Ynrusa is not the material came of the Purely Pheno- 
menal. 
It is only the instlru~wi~t:rl 
came. For this reason the s u  btlety 
of the Nulaprak~iti is described as not liable to he exceeded. 

I 
VACHASPATI'S 
GLOSS. 
noes the range of though h-transformation with reference to objective appearances 
extend U!, 
to the subtle elemeilts only? No. ' And t h e  province of subtle reaches up 
to the noumenal. 
The characteristic of the odoriferous ultimate atom (gandlta tnnmjtra) is in relation 
to the atom of the earthy class (PriLhvi') the subtle object of the faculty of thought- 
transformation. In other places i t  should be construed in the same way. 
The purely Phenomenal is t h e  Great Principle (~Mahittattva), 
because it is that which 
immediately passes into latency (liiiga) into. the Mulaprahpiti. The noumenal is the 
Mulaprakyiti, because it does not pass into latency (aliiga), into any other state. 
He describes the rescliing np to t h e  noumenal :-' There is nothing subtler, &C.' 
States an objection :-g 
But it may be, &C.' 
Replies :-' True, &C.' 
The meaning is 
that as a material cause subtlety exists in the noumenal only, nowhere else. 
But the Mahat and the principle-of i~~dividuality 
exist for fulfilling the objects 
of the Puruy. The Pnrup also is, therefore, n canse of the noumenal. .Why should 
it be said that stublety exists only i n  t h e  noumennl ? For this reason, he sags :-It is cer- 
tainly a cause but not the material canse. As Mulaprakriti evolves into the phenomenon 
of Rlahat and  onward^, not so the Purusa, 
I 
Finishes-:--'For 
this reason the st~blcty of the Mulaprakriti isjtescribed as not 
capable of being exceeded.--45. 
SCltra 46. 
m: Tbh, they. m Eva, only. vh: Sabijnh, seeded, &:, Sambdhib, trance. 
46. Thev 
*, are the seeded trance only. 
vybsa. 
e 
These four descriptions of tltought-tr*ansfo~.mation have their origin 
(seed) i n  external objects. 
Therefore is t.he trance too ' seeded.' 
In the 
case of the gross objects it is the Indistinctire and the 1Xstinctive. In 
tlm subtle objects it is the  meditative and the Ultra-meditative. 
Thus 
i~ trance described to be four-folrl.-46. 
VACHASPATIS 
GLOSS. 
Says that the four states of thought-transformation have the objective for their 
sphere of operation, constitute the cognitive trance :-' They are the seeded trance only.' 
The word L only ' is to be taken as qualifying t h e  word ' seeded.' 
By this the four descrip- 
tions of thought-transformation, having the objective state of existencc as their sphere, 
are limited by being qualified as seeded. 
The qualiby of being seeded, however, is not restricted too these. It appliee to the 
thought-transformations which have the subjective and the instrumental modifications 
also for their sphere of operation, in both its descriptions of uncertain (savikalpa) and 
Certain (nirvikalpa). For this rea.son there are said to be four descriptions of thought- 
transformation in the case of the objective and the instrumental phenomena. Thus there 
are eight descriptions in all. The meaning of the cpmmentary has been explained.-46. 

M m  Nirvichka, of the ~Itrarneditative. 
Vaiibradye, when there ie 
the undisturbed, pure flow. WWTVI Adhybtma, subjective, spiritual. W: 
Prasbdah luminosity, the fixedness of the mind. 
47. The undisturbed flow of the ultra-meditative 
causes Subjective Luminosity. 
\ 
r, 
s-~tllqmq: 
I 
q~qEKmT5l'kw ~
V
K
~
T
~
3- 
~wtaitrwf*~: 
W: 
mm3r Qmaq 
I uqr *rrs 
~ ~ 3 & 1 m f b . ~  
wstr wr 9 
R
:
 
I ~~~: m- 
: 
: 
I arlr Btmq I ~WrZrwqumPr 
$ ~ B h t r n ; ~  
I 
qmdM4: wa=maqp?T@ I1 W 
vytsa. 
' IJndisturbed flow ' is the pure and col~stant flow, not overpowered 
by disturbing' energy (rajas) and inertia (tarnad, of the essence csattva j 
of the Will-to-know, the very self of light, with the veil of ilnpurity 
covel*ing i t  removed. 
When this rudisturbed flow is secured for the 
Ultra-lneclitative trance, tl~e YogZ attains Subjecti~e Luminosity. His 
intellectual vision becorlles clear with regard to objects as they exist., 
irrespective of a11 sequence. 
And so it has been said :-' H a v i ~ ~ g  
reached 
the stage of intellectd luminosity, the wise man is no longer nn object 
of compassion ; he looks upon and colnpassionates others, a s  one upon c? 
height looks dew upon those in the plains. 
9 
V~CHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Now he describes the beauty of the n~tra-meditative among the four description@ 
of thought,-transformation, which have t h e  objective a8 their sphere of operatior~ :-The 
undisturbed flow of the ul tra-meditative causes Subjective Lu nlinosity.' 
Describes the 
meaning of the words, ' undisturbed flow ':-' The pure, BC.' * Ibpurit ' is the adhesion 
of disturbing energy (rajas) and inertia (tarnas). The same is a sort of dirt having the 
quality of a veil. When the veil is removed from t h e  essence of the Will-to-know, it 
shines out as the very self of light, and is therefore said to be not overpowered by them. 
But then, if the sphere of thooghbtransformation is the objective modification of 
existence, how can it secure fiubjective Luminosity ? For this reason, he says :--l Wit h 
regard to objects as they exist.' 
The subjective is not its object. U is only that in 
which the subjective self lives, that becomes its object as such. 
Without regard to all sequence ' means ~irnult~aneously. 
Quotes on this subject the GQths of the Great Seer :-b 
And so it has been said.' 
Finding himself above all, on having reached the highest poinh of the vision of know- 
ledge, he is sorry to see the men of the world suffering from the three descriptions of 
pain.-47. 

Cfi. I. 
ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 48,49. 
Rita~bharb, full of truth, full of essence, essential cognition. m 
Tatra,. there in, m prajB%, the faculty of cognition. 
48. Therein the faculf y of Essential Cognition. 
l 
S* hTg=mfm 1 U4 II 
- 
.VYHSA. 
The cognitive faculty which shows itself in that state in the mind 
of the wise, bears the name of Esser&d Cogrii tion (Rita~nbhari). The 
terln itself expresses the tlefi nition. 
It a1 ways cognizes 
L 
the essence, the 
I 
r 
truth. 
I'iie~-e isuoteveila*t.i*aco 
of falselrnowleclge. 
C -  
I 
, And so it has been said :--' CultJivhting the mind in the three mavs 
U 
of verbal and i~fei*en 
tial cogili tions and the practice of contemplation with 
tastefulness, one gets the lligllest Yoga.'-48. 
V~XMSPATI'S GLOSS. 
1 
Expresses the concurrence of the Yogis by mentioning a technical term well-known 
among them and defining its own meaning :-' Therein, the faculty of essential cognition.' 
l 
The Commentary is easy. ' Cultivation by verbal cognition ' means the hearing of the 
Vedas. 
l 
' Cultivation by inferential cognition ' means t,hinking. 
Contemplation means keeping in mind. Practice means over and over again. Con- 
, 
templation with tastefulness means welcome contemplation.-48. 
Sfitra 49. 
* U  A 
m Bru ta, heard, verbal. F Anumbna inferential. m, Prajnabhy&m, 
0 
from those of cognition. 
h y a ,  different. 
Visaya object. 
W&WW Any8 
&ay&, 
having objects different from. 
fdrjaand- 
Viiesa-arthatvat, because it 
refers to particulars ( 63q ) 
. 
l 
49. It has different objects from those of verbal 
aucl inferential cognition, as it refers to particulars. 

PATANJALT'S YOGA. 
c 
And that, inoreover, has different objects from those of verbal 
and inferential cogni tions, as it refers to particulars.' 
Verbal cognition refers to knowledge received from another. It 
has the generals for its objects. It is riot possible to describe the parti- 
culars by words. 
Why ? a  
Because there is no conventional denotation 
of the particular in words. 
Similarly, itiferential cognition has the generds for its objects. 
Wherever there is approach there is inotion ; wherever there is no approach 
there is no motion in existence. This has been said. Further inference 
arrives at conclusions by means of the generic qualities. Therefore there 
is no particular which can be made the object of induction and verbal 
cogr~i 
tion. 
Ordinary perception does not cognize the subtle, the distant and 
the intercepted. 
Nor can it be said that this particular does not exist for 
want of authority. This particular can only be cognized by the trance 
cognition, whether it be present in the subtle elements or in the Purusa. 
Hence this coguition has diff erell t objects from those of inEerentia1 and 
verbal cogni tions, because it has the pnrt[culars for its objects. 
Very well, the ultra-meditative has for its sphere of action the objects cognizable 
by verbal and inferential cognition and i s  the cultnination of these faculties. It can 
therefore operate upon the objects of verbal and inferential cognitions only. Because 
it is not certainly possible that a mental potency born ou< of practice with reference 
to one object of thought, should be capable d causing the knowledge of another 
object. This would mean going beyond the proper limits. Therefore if the essential 
cognition is t,he same as the ultra-meditative, its objects must be the samg as those of 
verbal and inferential cognitions. For this reason, he says :-' It has different objects.' 
Mental Essence is luminous by nature, and has the power of knowing all objects. 
When veiled by inertia (tamas) it cognizes only upon the veil being removed by energy 
(rajas). vhen, however, upon the impurities of inert'ia and disturbing energy being 
removed by practice and desirelessness, the pure light shines forth, then, light passes 
beyond the limits of all measures andall finite objects, and becomes infinite ; what then 
is there that does not fall within the sphere of its action ? 
Explains :-' Verbal cognition is the knowledge received from another.' Its sphere 
of action consists of the universal. Why ? Words cannot connote particulars. Why ? 
Because of their not being limited and because of overlapping (vyabhichgra.) 
There is no conventional denotation of t h e  particular in words,' because the relation 
of the sign and the thing signified is not found existing between a word and the parffcular. 
Nor is such r particular possible of being expressed by the meaning of a sentence. 

0 N TRA NCE (SA MADHI), 40,50. 
The same is the case with inference, whose operation depends upon the relation 
existing between the sign and the thing signifled (the liiiga and the liiigi) :-'Similarly, 
- 
has induction, &C.' The words 'wherever' and ' there' denote the pervader anit the 
pervaded, by a change of places. For this reason the conclusion is arrived a t  here by 
virtue of the comtnon property. Concludes-' 
therefore there is, &C.' 
M7ell, then, let it be the ordinary perception which does not depend for its operation 
upon t h e  knowledge of any relationship.. For this reason, he says :-' Nor call it be said, 
&C.' Ordinary perception may not depend for its operation upon the recognition of 
relationship. It does certainly depend upon the senses, and the senses are not in their 
sphere here (i.e., in the essential cognition). This i i  the meaning. 
Well, but, if the particulars are not such objects as can be known by verbal, inferen- 
- tial and perceptive cognitions, then, there is no authority for their existence. Ror this 
reason, he says :-'Nor 
can it be said that the particular does not exist for want of author- 
itq.' 
The meaning is that a means of knowledge (pramQa) is neither CO-exis ten t with nor 
the cause of the thing known. It is not therefore necessary that the reality to be known 
should cease to exist, because there is no means or power of knowing it. Those who rely 
, 
upon the ordinary means of knowledge, do not doubt the existence of a deer-like mark in 
I 
the moon a t  a time when only certain phases of hers nrevisible. For this reasori it is said 
that it is capdble of being known by the trance cognition alone. 
C . 
Rere the atoms and the Puriqas which are the subjects of discussion, are each of 
the nature of independent particularities, because, being substances, they are all separate 
from each other. All those that are separate from ono another, being substances, are 
of the nature of independent particularities, as, say, sugar and a hair-shorn mendicant. Thus 
by this inference and by authority the special province of the essential cognition is 
defined, because otherwise there ,would remain a doubt as to its real nature, brought 
- 
about by ordinary reasoning. 
Still, the attempt to define it is not complete, and its 
existence is bwught within the sphere of consciousness with difficulty, on account of 
its being far removed from ordinary objects, by inference and authority. The knowledge 
although thus brought about with difficulty is not so plain and well-defined as the know- 
ledge of collectivity, &C., obtained by words demting thcin along with the proper 
accessories of enuiuerstion of signs (signifying the particolar object). Thus it is that 
its object is different from the objects of verbal and inferential cogniti6ns.-49. 
Sdtra 50. 
m: Taj ja$, born therefrom. ?km: Sapskbrah, residual potencies, impres- 
sions. m Anya, other. Fivm Sa~qsk 
bra, residual potencies, impressions. d"?F& 
pratibandhi, impeding. 
50. Residual potencies born therefrom impede other 
residual potencies. 

84 
PA'L'ANJBLI'S YOGA. 
When the trance cognition has been reached, the Yogt acquires 
by the exercise of that cognition, nerver and newer residual potencies. 
6 
9 
The resic1 ual potencies born tllerefronl irnpetie other residual potencies. 
d 3 
The potency born of trance impedes the outgoing vehicle of potencies. 
By overpowering the outgoing tendencies, notions due to tliern cease to 
exist. On the suppression of these ilotiotls the trance faculty gains 
I 
'I 
f 
in power. Theu again the activitly of trance cognition. 
h e n  again 
1 
residua caused by the act of cogtiition. 
In this way the vehicle of 
potencies is being constantly renewed. 
We11 the act of cognition is caused by the potency and the potency 
is can~ed by the act. 
How is it then possible that the mind may not. 
r .I 
be given by this vehicle of potencies an object in itself ? 
h e  potencies 
< 
born out of the trance cognition do iwt give the mird a duty to perfarun 
with r*eference to themselves, because they are the cause of the rernoval 
r l 
of the amictions, i hey bring about- the finishing of the duty which the 
mind has to perform. It is only up to the attainment of discrilhinative 
knowledge that the activity of the miud has to last. 
V~CHASPATI'S 
GLOWS. 
/ 
Let that be. The cognitive trance has the reality of an object for its sphere of 
operation. Practice and t.he other moans of restrail2t as described, are liowever out- 
going potencies. The trance cognition is known to be firmly bound up with them. They 
must therefore be obstacles to the full realizatJion of that skate of ccnsciousncss, shine 
as it woold like atomic twinkles of light in the midst of' a hurricane. To remove this 
doubt the commentator introdoccs the aphorism :--'When the trance cognitim 123s been 
reached, tc.' 
Reads the ap horisln :-' Residual po tenoies born therefrom impede other 
residual potencies. 
The word, there* in ' therefrom* signifies the ultra-meditatjive thought-transforms- 
tion. 'Other' means the outgoing. Ifidination tlowards the realities of objects is of 
the very nature of the mind.' It is unsteady and wanders only so long as it does not reach 
the reality. When that is reached it bakes up a steady position, and tu.rns round and 
in the way of the wheel of potency, bent upori purification (i.e., upon acquiring that 
potency). Doing this it must certainly impede bhe mutual succession of the po wcp and 
.:C 
of the cognition of unredihies, although the st~ccession has had no beginning. The 
outsiders also say the same :- ' Unreal cognitions do not contradict the nature of the 
objects as they do exist in reality, free frmn defects, even th(3ugh the unrea!ities have 
existed from eternity; because &he mind is natumlly inclined howards the realities.' 
TTery well, grmt that the outgoing potencies are restrained by the operations of 
the trance cognition. Rut the Brst manifestation of the trance cognition has for i b  
final objecb the ever-increasing unchecked ruanifestation of the poteney of trance cogni- 
tion. Thus it is plain that the mind even in thab state, has the same old quality of 
having still R firnction to perform. (The attaintnent of the tr3nce cognition too does 

ON TRANCE (SAMADHI), 50, 51. 
not take it. any marer to the fulfilment of its object'. This is the question raised ' How 
is it i hen that the mind, &C.' 
Refute& 
;-6 
The potencies born out of, &a.' 
There are 
but two objects of the mind, the enjoyment of sound, &c,, and the attainment of Diserl- 
siuative knowledge. Of these .the enjoyment of sound, &C., comes into operation with 
the existence of tbo vehicles of ~Iflictiori and acti~n. When, however, the power which 
springs from the manifest ation of trance cognition, entirely roots ouL t'he vehicles of 
wtinn and affliction and the mind for that reason exists in the state of having mostly 
fulfiliod i t s  objects, tile olily object that then remains for it to achieve, is the attainment 
of Discriminative knowledge. Therefore the potencies of the mind due to the practice 
of the trance cognition cannot gemrate the hsbits of returning to the duties of enjoy- 
ment. They mast check their forward march. They bring about the end of its daty 
of enjoyment., i. e., render it impotent to enjoy them. 
How ? The action of the mind 
lasts only up to the attainment of discriminative knowledge. The miud only works for 
enjoyment b as long as itt does not experience diecriminatfve knowledge. When, however, 
discrimi~ative knowledge is born, the afflictions are removed, and the duty of causing 
enjoyment is over. This is the meaning.-50. 
C "  
d ~ t r a  51. 
m Teeva, 
W 
of that. dG Api, too. 
6633 Nirodhe, by the ~upprossion.' G 
Sarva, of sll. 
Nirodhat, owing t o  the suppression. R 8 a :  Nirbijnb, seed- 
less. w~E: ISnmbd h&, traizce. 
51. A11 baing suppressed, by the suppression of 

PATA NJALI'S YOGA. 
experience of the succession in time of the act of suppression and the 
consequent rest. The mind disappears illto. its own inactive cause, along 
with the potencies which operate to lead to absolute freedom, and mllicli 
are born of the trance cognition operating to suppress the ol~tgoing 
potencies. These potencies, there fore, being opposed to the continuance 
of the dug df the mind, do not become the cause of its further existence 
aa such. And it is for this reason that the mind which has achieved 
its purpose, an:? along with it the potencies which operate to lead to 
.absolute freedom, ceased to act further. 
When the tnind ceases to act 
further, the Purup remains in its own true self, and is therefore pure, 
absolutely free, aucl released (m fi k ta) as he is called.--51. 
This finishes the flrst chapter, on trance, of the Safikhyapravachana Commentary of 
fhe Yogaigstra of Pataiijali. by Vyasa. 
V~CHA~PATIS 
GLO+%. 
It has been said that the cessation of the functiolt of enjoyment is the reason for 
acquiring the potencies of the trance cognition. Now he puts a question : ' And what moro 
oomes to the mind ?' 
The meaning is that inasmuch as the mind possessing t h e  potencies 
of the tranoe oognition, generates the flow of these potencies (into activity) the mind 
has still a duty to perform as before; because something else is necessary to remore 
the necessity of the performance of this fanction too. The :mswer is given bg t h e  
aphorism:--'All 
being suppressed, by the suppression of that too comes the seedlssa 
trance.' The meaning of the word ' too' is that not only the trance cognition, but the 
potencies generated bp the cognition are also suppressed by means of generating side bp 
side with these the potency of higher desirelessness, defined t? be the light of knowledge 
alone. The stream of the potency and -the .act of cognitio~18 
which are -being const,antly 
generated ooe from the otller, having been chocked, the effect is not borli without the 
cause ; and this is the seedleas trance. Explains :-' That' seedlcss trance, being brought 
about by the higher desirelsssness, which opposes the trance cognition, does by mcana 
of it8 aause, not only bocmse the opposer of the trance cognition, but at the same time 
ob&mcts the flow of the pokenoies generated by that cognition also. 
, 
Well, the knowledge born of deslrelessness may very well destroy the cognition 
f 
alone, because it exists as a cause. How can it destroy the potency, which in tact is no 
knowledge? Memory is seen operating even in a waking man with reference to objects 
seen in dreams. With this object he puts the qnestion : "Why ?' 
The answer is : ' The 
potency of the habit of suppression, &C., 
'Suppression' is that by which the cognition 
is suppressed, that is t h e  Higher desirelessnesa. It is from that, that the potency of the 
C 
habit of suppression is born. 
The meaning is that it is not by the cognition but by the 
yot.ency born of higher desikessness, long, uninterfuptedly and devotedly practised, 
that t h e  potenoy of the ~ g n i t i o n  is destroyed. Well, let that be. 
But what authority 
ia there for the existence of Ule potency of the habit of suppression ? It can either be 
known by perceptiaa, or inferred by its effect, the memory thereof. But the Yogi can 
have no perception when all the mental modifications have been suppressed. Nor can 
he have memory, because the act of suppression operating upon the act of modification 
as such can leave no memory behind. Bor this reason, he says :--' The existence of the 
potency is to be inferred, &C.' 
The 'rest' in suppression means t h e  state of suppression. 
The succession in time of that state means n mrldr*ta, an how and a half, d:ry and 
night, &o. The experience is to be 00 this succession. 'This is the meaning. The intensity 

CB. I. 
ON TRAKCE (SAMADHI), 51. 
of suppression is in accordance with the intensity of desirelessness and practice; and 
this intensity is taken note of by its extension over the periods of time known as 
muhitrta, an hour-and-a-half, &C., by the Yogi. 
And inasmuch as the moments of 
desiwlessness do not exist together on account of a fixed order in the appearance, and 
on account of their extending over their own special periods of time, they cannot be 
adequate to bring about the intensity of suppression ; it; is therefore the store of the 
potential energy thereof, born of the collective effect of the moments of desireiessness, 
indulged now and again, that is desired to be und~rstood here. 
Well the potencies of cognition 'may ,be destroyed. But how can the potencies of 
suppression be destroyed ? For if they be not destroyed, the mind has still a duty left to 
perform. For this reason, he Rays :-L 
The mind disappears, &C.' 
The trance cognition which suppresses the outgoing tendencies is the cogni- 
tive trance. It is the potencies born from that, that a2e here spoken of. 
The potencies 
which operate to lead to absolute freedom are the potencies born from the acts of sup- 
pression. Because the potencies of the outgoing acts of cognition have become embedded 
in the mind, it is said to be the possessor of the potency of outgoing cognition. The 
potency of suppression, however, is but newly born in the mind. The mind has therefore 
no duty to perform, eveu though t h e  potency of suppression exists. The mind which has 
the duty of achieving the purposes of the Purup, is said to have the dtity of achieving 
those objects. The purposes it has to achieve are the enjoyments of sound, &C., and the 
attainment of discriminative knowledge. 
When however the potency of suppression only remains, the Puruy is no longer the 
snb~fratnrn of the reflex consciousness of the kill-to-he (buddhi). Hence the potency 
of suppression cannot be an object of the Purup to be fulfilled by the mind. The minds 
of the Videhas and the Prakpitilayas do not consist of a balance of suppressive potencies 
alone ; they have therefore still a duty to perform. Also because they are posaossed of 
the aroma of affiictions. 
With this in mind, says t h e  commentator :-'And it is for this reason, &C.' 
I'he rest 
is easy.-51. 
The object and explanation of Yoga, the meaning of the modifications for the purpose 
of t h e  performance thereof, the means of Yoga and its kinds are described in this chapter, 
Here ends the flrst chapter of VBchaspnti's Gloss, the Vgchaspatya, on the commen- 
tary of VySsa on the Aphorisms of Pltmjali. 

CHAPTER THE SECOXD. 
ON TITE PRG.CTICE OF YOGA. 
cannot be dispersed without pu~ificatory action (tapas). For this reqson 
- -  
I 
- 
* The word ' tapas' has> been translated as purificatory action, because 
tapas' 
means that which burns up impuritia. 
The word idwaraprayidh8na' has been translated as the dev&ion to God being thd 
motive of action. The siltne word in 
first chapter ( I .  23) has bee11 translated as 
feeling the omnipresence of the Lo~d, The root meaning of the word ' pranidhirm ' ia 
tile placing of anything under another to the fulleat oxtent (pm = fullness, Ni -. under and 
dh$na=placing). In the chapter 011 trailcs the word can only mean the contemplatioll of 
Him as the substratum of 
phenomonrr. &mce L&~~arspranidhiha' 
as a means of 
~ h i c v i n g  trance can 0111; mean the habituatkg of the mind to feel the omnipresence 
of the diviue principle. h a chapter on the Yoga of action however the word c a n ~ ~ o t  
be 
interpreted as carrying the same meaning. As s branch of the 'Yoga of actiou L praniclhina' 
must have special reference to actisn which would be out; of place it1 contemplation. It h=, 
therefore, been trmslrted here a8 above. The root meaning, it is easy to see, runs 
through both these meanings. 

ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA. 1. 
-- 
purificatory action has been taken np (as a factor of the Yoga of action). 
1 rhis is considered an action worthy of performance, as it purifies the 
mind tvllen not impeded. 
Study is the repeated Gtterance cf purifying words, like the A U M 
and others ; or, the readil~g of the teachings about absolute spiritual free- 
dom (Moksa). 
' The devotion to God and making Him the nmtirc oE all actions' 
means the dedicrttirlg of al.1 xtions to the Highest Teacher, or the renun- 
ciation of its fruit.-52. 
, 
~ACHASPATI~S GLOSS. 
The question b that the fruit of Yoga and the means thereof, having been described 
in the first ehapter along with t h e i ~  
sub-heads, what is the neceisity of writing a second 
chapter ? The answer is given :-b 
The Yoga for him, Le.' 
It is only practice and clesirelessness that have been mentioned in the first chapter 
to be the means of Yoga. They ape, however, not possible for the out-going mind also at 
once. The means, therefore, to be taught ill the second chapter are necessary in order to 
achieve the required purity of uncntnl essence. It is only threatter that the essence 
of the Will-to-lmovJ, becoming strong enough to preserve itself in that state, daily shows 
forth the powers of practice and desirelessness. 
'Already inclined towards the trance cognition' means not only occasionally 
steady. The meaning is how may the out-going mind also become possessed of Yoga by 
the pra,tice of the means to be taught ? 
The author of the aphorisms first takes cap some of these means as of firstrate 
, 
importance and usdaluess, and describes them as the Yoga of action ' Purificatozy 
scbion, &C.' 
/ 
I 
It is bhe action itself that is tohe Yoga in the Yoga of action. It is for this reason that 
in the Vislu~puriQ~a 
a *  
in the dialogue between Kciidhwaja and Kh@dilrya it is*saicl:- 
' When the Yogi first.co=es int,o contact with the Yoga, he is cslled the Yufijamha, 
the Neophyte, the Beginner.' And bey inning with this are mentioned purificatory 
action sild study, &c. 
Now the comment shows by the can011 of difference that purificatory action must be 
a means of Yog:r :-' Yoga is not attailled by one who is not given t o  purificatory action.' 
He shows a subsicliary result of the purificatory action, justifying its nature as a meads 
of Yoga :--' Impurity, &C.' The impurity which is vnrieggted by the aroma cl eternal 
action and aftliction, and which is for t b k  very reason in ccubact with, i.e., approached by 
the network of enjoyables, consists in the intensity of disturbing energy (rajas) and 
inertia (t1arnas), and cannot come to dispersion without purificatory action. hispersion 
means the entire separation 9f objects in thick cohesion. 
But the question is what purificatory action may be inimical to Yoga, inasmuch ss 
being taken up as a means of Yoga, it may become the cause of the disturbance of the 
physiological equilibrium of the forces of the body. How thec can it be a means of Yoga ? 
For this reason the commentator says :- ' This is considered an action, &C.' 
The meacing 
is that so much of a purificatory action only is bo be performed as does not caase the 
distwbance of the equilibriom of physiological forces. 
The words AUM, he., include such portions ot the b d a  as the PurosaSukta, the Rudra 
Mandala 
W
*
 
and the Brahrna!~as, &C., as also the portiou~ of the PurQas mch a8 the 
12 

PATAh7JA LI'S YOGA. 
BrahmapPra, &c. The Eighest Teacher is iriwara. To him are actions to be dedicated. It 
is on this subject that the following has been said :--' 
Whatever I am doing, beautiful or 
ugly, with desire or without desire, I renounce all that on thy account ; I do all things 
with submission to thee.' 
The renunciation of fruit means the doing of an action without thinking in connec- 
tion with it of the fruit to be obtained thereby. The following has h e n  said in this 
connection :-It 
is in the doing of action alone that thy duty lies, never in its fruits. 
Never make the fruit of action its motive ; never become attached to inaction.-l. 
Sfitra 2. 
&+ 
Earnadhi, trance. 
Rhhana, bringing about. d: Arthab, for tha 
purpose of. 
t a  Xleda, afflictions. q*: 
TanQ karapbrthah, for the purpose 
-of attenuating. v: Cha, ande 
2. For the purpose of bringing about trance and for 
VYASA. 
The Yoga of action is certaiilly to be peifolmed, ' for the purpose of 
b r i u g i ~ ~ g  
about trance m d  for the purpose of at ten uatiug the amic tions.' 
It is that wllicll being perfortnetl, brings aborlt trance and atlenuates ihe 
afflictions. 
'Yhe afflictions thus attenuated 
become characterised by 
unprodncti veuess. 
I 
t1Ar seed power I m ,  as it were, bee11 singed 
by the fire of High 111tullecth ; and for this reason the mind iiiter their 
attenuation. is never again touclletl by the affliction ; and having by 
subtle cogni tJion come up to the d iscrimi nnt ion of the tl isti llct riatufes of 
the Put-uta arid Objective Esse~~ce, 
has the who!e 
of its duty fulfilled 
and can o d y  resolve into its cause.--53. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
The aphorisln defining its object is i~ltroduced:-' The Yoga of action is certainly, 
&C.' 
The aphorism is :-'For 
the purpose of brhgil~g 
about tra~lce and for the purpose of 
attenuating the afflictions.' 
The question arises that if the Yoga of action alone be competent to attenuate the 
amictions, there remains no use at all in High Inteilection. For this reason t h e  commen- 
tator says :-'L The afflictions thus attenuated become, etc." 
The action of the Yoga of 
action operates only in attenuating them; it does not render the afflictions barren. 
High Intellection, .ho werer, operatas to render them barren. 
Let that be granted. But if High htellection alone is competent to render the 
aEictionu non-productive, what is the use of attennating them ? For this reason he says :- 
On account of their attenuation, &C.' If the affiictions me not attenuated, t h e  discrimi- 
nation of the distinct natures of the Puru$a and the Objective Essence, remaining 
J 

CH. II. 
ON THE PRACTICE OP YOGA 2, 3. 
91 
I 
overpolvered by a powerful enemy, does not even show the energy to riseand render 
them barren, from the very first. When, however, the afflictions have been dispersed and 
rendered weak, even then, though inimical to them, it only arises by practice and 
desirelessness. When it has thug been born, it is nob again touched by them, it is not 
overpowered so long as it is not touched by them. The discrimination of the distinct 
natures of the Porup and Objective Essence is s subtle faculty, because its objeat is 
subtle. 
" Can only resolve into its causew-means can only disappear.--2. 
Sfitra 3. 
Avidyb, nescience. * 
Asmitil, egoi~m. n Rbga, attachment. 
Dve~a, aversion. d % R h  ~hhiniveda, love of life, all these. : 
Kledlb 
afnictions. 
3. The afflictions are Nescience, Egoism, Attachment, 
Aversion and Love of Lif e.- 54. 
What then are the afflictions and horn many? '.The aWictions are' 
Nescience, Egoism, A ttachment, Aversion and love of Life.' 
'The afAictions' are the five forms of Upreal Cognition. When 
quick with life, they render the rule of 
thee " qualities " firm, establish 
change, send out the stream of cause and effect, bring about the fruc- 
tification of action by 
v 
coming to clepend upon one another for mutual 
How is its duty fulfilled ? It can only be so said to haw fulfilled its duty, when it 
has caused the cessation of the action of the " qualities ;" inasmuch as t h e  duty Ls 
nothing else but the bringing about of an effect by the "qualities." 
For this reason the- 
commentator puts the question, ' What are the afflictions, . 
And he answers by the 
aphorism : -" 
Nescience, &C." Nescience and the others are the afflictions. He explains :- 
The five forms of Unreal Cognition, &C.' 
Noscience is Unreal Cognition 
v 
itself. Egoism and the others also carry nescience 
with them and canrmt exist without it. They too are therefore unreal co$nitions. The 
meaning is that for this reagon, they are destroyed with the destruction of Nescience. 
He says now that t h e  reason for their destructibility exists in their being the cause 
of repeated births :--'When quick with life,' i. e., when they are in operation, they render 
the rule of the qualities firm, i.e., strong. For this very reason they estlablish change. 
They send out, i.e, show forth the stream of cause and effect in the shape of the Unmani- 
fested, the Mahattattva (the great principle) and the principle of individuality. 
Now he shows t h e  object for which all this is done by them :-' Bring about, &cm... 
for lmttlrl support.' The fruotification of action colmists in life-state, life-period an4 

life-experience. Thie is the object of the Paruea. It is these that the amictionv bring 
about. Does each of them do this by itself ? No he say8 :--' By mutual support ! ' The 
actions are supported by the afflictions and the ail'iiotions by the actions.-5. 
Satra 4. 
m: Avidyd, nescience. 9 q  Kgetram, field. m Uttare@m, for the 
others. m: 
U Prasupta, dormant. 9 
Tanu, tenuous, M: 
Vichchhinna, alter- 
nated. v ~ m n y  
I.?d$rOpbm, or fully operative, for all these. 
4. Nescience is the field for the others, whether. 
dormant, tenuous, alternated or f d l y  operative.-55. 
Of tbese, Nescience is the field, the breeding ground for the others 
that follow, the Egoism, 
&C., 
having a four-fold possible mode of 
their existence, as the dormant, the tenuous, the alternated and tvhe fully 
operative. 
What is dormancy? It is the existence in the mind as power 
alone in the germinal state. It is awake when it turns its face towards 
its objects. In the case of him who pclssesses discriminative knowledge, 
the gerlns of the a>fflictions are singed, and therefore even on the object 
coming in front, they do not come into operation. How call the burned 
up seed sprout ? Hence, the wise man whose aiftictions are gone, i s  

CB. 71. 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOt3tl 4. 
93 
. 
said to, have' had his last birth. It is in him alone that the afflictions 
pass into the fifth state, that of the ~ e e d  
Eeing burnt u p ;  inasmuch aEc 
the afflictions do exist in tbat state, although their mecl-powel has been 
bl~rnt up. It is for this reason that th& do not awaken even when an 
object comes in front of them. This i~ the dcnnancy of tlme whose seed- 
power has been burnt nh. 
Tennitv 
v is now described. The afflictions become t e n ~ ~ o u s  
on being 
cut down by habituation to contrarie.:. 
And they are alternated, inasmuch ss they disappear and appear 
over and over again in the same condition. 
Anger is not obser~wl to be 
in operation at the time of attachme~~t~. 
Anger does not arise when 
attachment has its play. Nor does it happen that attachment, while 
manifesting ai tll reference to one object, has cea.sed to exifit altogether 
with reference 'to another object. Recmse Chaitra is attached to one 
wowan, it does llot follow that Ile is averse to otl~ers. The *fact is that in 
the one hie attachmel~t has manifestecl itself, while in others it can-be 
active in the future. It is tiris that hec~lnes either donnnnt, tenuous or 
alternated. 
The fully operative is that which has found manifestation in the 
object. 
All these do not pass beyold the sphere of affliction. 
What ie it 
. 
then that is cdled an affliction, whether it be the dormant, the alternated 
, or the R~lly operative? This i~ true. But they become either alternated 
ol* anv 
W one else, only when they appear as so qaalified. 
A s  all are 
removed hy l~abitnntion to contraries, a11 art? manifested bv 
m the operation 
of competent causes. 
All these aiffictions are the modifications of Nescience only. How ? 
It is Nescience alone that is the quickness of their life. The afflictions 
appear only in the form which is put upon an object by Nescience. They 
are found existing simultaneously with the cognition of the unreal ; and 
they clisappear when Ne~cience disappears.-55. 
I 
V AGH ASPATI'S GLOSS. 
I 
The commentator shows that the afflictions which are to be overcome as being painf a1 
have their root in Nescience. 
" Nescience is the field for the others, whether dormant, 
tenuous, alternated or fully operative." 
What of these is dormancy 1 The meaning of the questioner is that there is no 
authority for the existence of the afflictions at a time when they are not in operrrbion with 
reference to objects. The answer is :-b 
In the mind, &C.' 
The afflictions of the Videba 
and the Prakritilayas do not operate with reference to their proper objects ; they have 
gono 
the germinal state, and ss such do exist ouly in posse, ra curds exiet in milk. 
Tilere is no other means of making them barren besides discriminative knowledge. It 

PATANJALT'S YOGA. 
is for this reason that the Videhas and the Prakritilayas are ut~derstood as not possessed 
of discriminative knowledge. Their afflictions are dormant so long as they do not reach 
the limit of their time. When they do reach the limit, the afflictions come round again 
into manifestation end turn towards their various objects. They have existed in the 
potential state alone. This potency means the power of mqnifesting. The approach to 
the germinal state indicates the power of producing the effect. 
How is it that' the afflictions of him who is possessed of discriminative knowledge 
are not also dormant ? To show this the commentator says :--' To him who is possessed 
of discriminative knowledge.' 
' Last birth' means that he will not be born in another body. There will be no birth 
after the present one. 
6 No where else ' means in the disembodied (the Videhas), &c. But inasmuch as that 
which is, cannot be entirely destroyed, there is no w e  in t h e  power of Yoga ; the afflic- 
tions arise when their objects come in front. o r  this reason the commentator says :- 
6 The sffljctions do exist, &C.' The meaning is that a1 though the afflictions esist, yet their 
seed-power is burnt up. 
The contraries of the afflictions are the practices of the Yoga of action. The 
afflictions become toonous when they are pot dowll by the Yoga of action. Or, Right 
knowledge is the contrary of hscienae: the recogtlition of the distinction is the 
contrary of egois~o : justice is the contrary of attachnel~t and a version ; the reinoval of. 
the idea of dependence upon the body, i. e., that the h d y  is the necessary adjunct of t h e  
soul, is the opposite of the love of life. 
NOW he describes alternation :--'Similarly, &C.' The afflictions are overpowered bg - 
another affliction being in operation fop the time ; or they arise and manifest themselves 
after alternate cessations on account of excessive enjoyment. Its difference fronl the dor- 
mant is explained by its being dependent for manifestation upon the seed-poner 
O 
and the 
organs of enjoyment ; or by its repeated manifestatioll and cessation on account of the 
weakness of other manifestations which tend to overpower i t ;  or by reiterated mainfesta- 
tious. Further attachment iil csse many overpower anger, which belongs to a different class 
of affiictions. Or, an afHiction of the same class, such as attachment to one object may 
overpower attachment to a different ohjech. For this reason he sajs :-b 
~ t , t a c h m ~ ~ t ,  
bc.9 
Now he says that the affliction which is to manifest in the future mu& be understbod 
to possess a three-fold line of action, whichever j t may be at any time : 
-- G It is at that 
time, &C. 
The word that' points only to the affliction which is to manifest in the future, 
not to the attachment of Chaitra, because that is of m e o f  the three classes, i. e., the 

l
.
 
11. 
ON THE PRACTTCE OF YOGA 5. 
95 
- 
4 
newiencc, &C.' 
He explains the same. ' Whenever, &C.' 
The rest is easy. The following 
is a brief'statement. In those that are merged in some principle, the afilictions are dor- 
mant. In the Yogis they are tenuous. Ia those who are gi.ven to enjoyment (the ordinary 
mortals), they are alternate and operative. 
SQtra 5. 
&m Anitga, the non-eternal. 
APuchi, the impure. 
$:W Dubkha, the 
painful. wmq AnLtman, the not self. all these. 
f;n9 Nitya, the eternal. 
gfi: 
6uchib, the pure. W 
U Sukka, the pleasureable. 
CWF~ Atman, soul. mf%: I(hy$tib S 
supposing, taking to be. 
w f ~ t  
Avidyb, nescience. 
5. 
Nescience is the taking of the non-eternal, the 
C 
impure, the painful and the not-self to be the eternal, 
the pure, the pleasurable and the self.-56. 
VY LSA. 
- 
i 
Out of these the nature of Nescience is described :--'c~escience jrc 
%lle taking of tKe non-eternal, the impure, the painful, and tile n ~ t - ~ ~ l f  
to 
be the eternal, the pure, the pleasurable and the self." 
The taking of the non-eternnl to ke eternal is the possession of RU& 
notio~ls as that the earth is permanent, the firmament with tlm moon and 
the stars is permanent, the gods are immortd, &c. 

96 
PATANJALT'S YOGA. 
Similar is the seeing of purity in the body, which is impure and 
highlv 
W 
rli~gusting. And it has been wid:--'The 
wise k m w  the body to 
be impure on account of its position, its origin, its process of up-keep, 
its perspiration and destru~t~ion 
and also on account of the necessity of 
9 
keepingNit constantly clean. 
Thus is purity seen in the i1l?pure. ' The 
girl is attractive like the new moon. Her limbs am, a s  it were, made of 
honey and nectar. She looks, as it were, she has emerged fro111 the moon. 
Her eyes are large like the leaves of a blue lotus. With piayful flashes 
of her eyes she imparts life to the wo~*lcl of men. ' 
NOW what is in this 
connected to what? This uureal cognition, howcver, of the pllre in the 
ilnpure is daily seen. 
By this is described the cognition of the sacred 
in the pl*ofane, the cognition of purposeless. 
a s  here so -will the cognition 
of pleasure in pain be later tlescri bed. 
The cognition of pleasul-e under these circumstances is Nescience. 
Similar is the cognition of the selE in the not-self. 
The external 
accessories, whether sentient or not sentient, the body wliich is the vehicle 
for enjoy~nent~, 
the -mind .cvhich is only a vehicle for the Poruga, are all 
manifestatiol~~ 
of the not-self. 
The notion that any one of these is. tile 
is &scieuce. 
On this subject the following has heen said :-- 
' 'L'hose who believing the sentient or insentient objective essence to 
be tile self, lne,ioice in their increase believing it the prospel*ity of the 
self, ancl are auxious when tliey decrease, belikving it to be the adversity 
the self h a ~ e  
not awakened. ' 
Tllis uescience is thus possessed of four locatioas. It is the root of 
all this overgrowth of afflictions, the vehicle of action together with the 
oE fruition. 'L'his nesqience sl&dd bo understood as being a real 
substance, filw the word Arnitra (a, not, and mitra, friend, the compound 
meaning an enemy) ancl the word Agotpada (a, not, ant1 gokpatla, cow's 
foot, the compound meaning a particular place). 
A s  the word Anlitra 
does not mean the absence of a friend nor a particular friend, . but - some- 
thing opposite to a friend, an enemy ; and as the word Ago+pada doea 
not mean the absence of a Gojpada, nor a particnlarcGoSpada, but a 
place distinct from both, another substance ; so is nescience 
Real Cognition nor the absence of Real Cognition. On the con- 
trary, Nescience is another form of cognition, which is contrary to real 
knowledga (the cognition of the real),-56. 
l 

ON THE PRACTICE OF YOQA, 5. 
Negclence is non-eternal and impure. It is, that is to say, m effect which is ever 
qnalified by the presence of non-eternity. There are some, it is well-known, who believe 
t 
t,he elements to be eternal, and medibate upon them devotedly with the object of assimi- 
lating their natures. Similarly do others meditste with devotion upon the heavens, the 
sun, moon, and stars as stages of the path of Smoke (the .Pit riyha,) with the object 
of reaching them in! the belief of their eternity. similarly do people drink the Soms 
juice for attaining the state of the denizens of heaven, t h e  gods, believing them to be 
eternal and immortal, inastn uch as the Veda says :--'Wink we the Soma so that me may 
become immortal.' This is the Nesoience which is described as the cognition of the eternal 
in the non-eternal. 
Similarly with reference to the impure and highly disgusting body. Having said 
this much, he stops in the middle to quote e verse of VyBsa, describing the disgusting 
nature of the body. 
' The wise, &c. 
9 
The 'position of the body ' in the mother's womb close to urine, &o. 
The ' origin ' 
is the germ and aperm.cells of parents. ' The process of the upkeep of the body ' is the 
transformation of the foods and drinks into chyle, &C. It is by this that the body is 
supported. Perspiration means sweating. fiestruction or death renderg.fhe body of even 
a man learned in the Vedo, impure, inasmuch as a bath is ordained after it has been 
touched. 
The question is that if the body is by nature impure, what then is the use of washing 
it with earths and water ? Fort his reason he says : ' On account of the necessity, &c( 
This meaps that althoagh by nature impure, the body admits of being purified by external 
applications ; as, for example, take the bodies of women by means of sweet smelling 
applications. 
He finiohes the sentence :-The 
body which is impure is cognised to be pure in the 
way now described. ' Like the new moon, &C.' 
'C 
Playful flashes denote the frolicsomeness of love." 
'.Now what is hero connected with what ? 
The first ' what' stands for the body of 
a woman which is by nature so impure and therefore disgusting. By what poor similitude 
is the body related to the new boo11 ? 
By this illustration of the cognition of the pure in the impure body of a woman, id 
also described the cognition of virtue in the vices of causing pain to others under the 
impression of their being released from the world. 
Similarly are described the notions of usefulness in wealth, &C., which on account of 
the troubles incident upon collection and presekation, &C., are really things which con- 
tradict the real purpose of life. They are all impure on account of their being causes of 
disgust. 
Bimilar is the case of the cognition of pleasure in pain. This is easy. 
'Similar is the cognition of self, &C.' This also is easy. 
Gimilarly has it been said on this subject by PafichaiikhL. 
' The sentient ' are the intelligent objects of enjoyment, such as wife, &C., and anim;lle. 
' The insentient' am the non-intelligent objects, such as seats and couches, &c. 
A11 such have not awakened, means they are forgetful. 
This nescience is said to possess four locations, i.e., places where it manifests. 
Upon this the question arises that nescience being really located in an inflnity of 
places, such for example, as the forgetfulness of directions and the appearance of a com- 
plete cimle in the case of a rapidly rotating point of light, &a., why should it be deedbed 
13 

PA?'ALVJAL?'S YOGA. 
as being located in four places only? For this reason he says :-'It is the root, &ca' There 
may be other forms of nescienco ; that however, which is the root of ~ e p e s t e d  births is 
only four fold. 
Now another question :-The 
word ' nescience' is a compound of ' ne ' (p = not) and 
science (&l - Science). Now is the prohibitive N E  (a), the effective wordof the compound, 
thus signifying the mere absence OF the thing signified by the second word, as in the word 
Arualisih-a, one meaning of which is the absence of be-. 
Or, is the secoild word of the 
compound the effective portion thereof, in which case it mould mean a particular form of 
knowledge, as in the case of the word ArBjapnrnsa, Not-public servant. Or, is it that 
the word denotes sornetl~ing which is neither the meaning of the first worcl nor of the 
second, but something different from both ? Sach a word would ho the word Amnlqiha, 
beeloss place. This meaning is different from the meaning of both the factors of the 
compound. 
Now the meaning ~f the word Nescience wonld be the absence of knowledge already 
existing, if the first word of the oompoond were the effective one. This, however, cannot 
be the cause of the afllictions. If the second word of _the compound be the effective one, 
then the meaning of the compound would be a science qualified by t h e  absence of some- 
thing (particular) the science of the negation, (A, of solnethi~l,~). Science, howover, can 
only he the opposite of t h e  atllictions, &C., 
not their seed. It is not proper that the 
destroyer of rr thiug should be a quality thercof* 
If it be co~lsidered t h a t  it means something different from both, then it can only 
mean the Will-to-know (buddhi) with the knowledge gbsent there from, i.e., sometlling 
in which there is no kuowledge. Now the Will-to-know can never be the cause of afflic- 
tions, &c,, e\%n though knowledge be absent therefrom. Whatever thus be the meaning 
given to Nescience, it cm never be the root of aaications, &c. 
For this reason he says :--' It is to be considered, &C. ' It is possessed .of substantiality. 
This mesus cannot be the abselm~ of something existiag as such. Neither is Ncscience 
a particular form of science ; nor is i t  the Will- to-know devoid of knowledge. It is, as has 
been said, a cognition contrary to the Real Cognition ; it is the cognition of the unreal 
(or briefly, unreal cognition.) 
i 
The relation of word and meaning depends upon how the world begins to understand 
. 
111 the world i t  is often seen that in words compoi~nclod with deprivativo prefixes, 
the deprivative prefix, while denying the existence of the last word of t h e  compou~:d, 
sigllifies somt,hing which is t h e  contrary thereof.. Similar is the meaning here. Ho give8 
analogies :--L A s  the word Amitro. ' I t  does not mean the absence of a friend ; nor does it 
mean a particular friend (a friend called A). On the contrary, i t  means the opposite of a 
friend, an enemy. 
Similarly, the word Agospada does not meail t h e  absence of a cow-shed , (goqpada) ; 
nor does it mean a partlicnlar cowshed (styled A). 0 1 1  the other hand, it means a particular 
country where liiile art: not found. It is a substance different from both. He applies the 
analogy to the thing illustrated :-'In the same way, &ce' 
e 
Drig, the subjective, power of consciuusnesx. 
Darsana, the instru-. 
I 
mental power of seeing. m,%: 6aktyob, of (both these) powers. m 
Ekbtmtii, 
itlen tity. 
W f va, appearance. 
afiinrr Asnlita, egoism. 

1 
GH. TI* 
Oh7 TBE PRACTICE OF YOGA., 6. 
99 
6. Egoism is the appearance of identity in the na- 
tures of the subjective power of consciousness and the 
instrumental power of seeing..--57. 
The Plwuga is the subjective power of consciousness, and the Will- 
to-know is the instrumental power of seeing. The appearance of these 
two powers as if they were identical, is the afffictiotl known as Egoism. 
Erljoymerlt is rendered possible when the power of -enjoyment in the ell- 
joycr and tt\le capacity oE being enjoyed in the 0 bjective Existence, 
,- _ 
which 
are qoite distinct and different from each other, are loolted upon as, as it 
were, identical. 
When, however, their natures have been understood they 
becorrle isolated ; nrd horn then can there be enjoyment? And so it has 
been said :-' Not knowing the Puruga beyond the Will-to-know to be 
different therefrom in nature, cliaracter and knowledge, &C., 
a man has 
by forgetfulness the notion of self therein.-57. 
, 
Having described Nescience, now he describes Egoism, which is quite as dear to the 
heart of man as attachment and the others :--' Egoism is the appearance of identity in the 
natures of the subjective power of coiisciousness and the objective power of seeing.' 
Consciousness and seeing are two distinct powers. 
They are, respectively, the self 
and the not-self. The particular Nescience which is responsible for the cognitioil of this 
]lot-self as the self, and which is only a delusion a n d  not a reality is Egoism. Although it was 
sufficient only to say "conscionsness " and " seeing " the word power is added to bring out 
their mutual relation of fitness as the enjoyer and the eujoyed. He explains the aphorism :- 
' The Purusa, &c. 
9 
The question arises, why should they nob in fact be considered as one when in fact 
they are taken in as such ? How is it that their unity afflicts the P u r u ~ a  
? 
For this 
reason he says :-' Enjoyment, &C.' 
The capacity of being enjoyed means the Will-to-be. 
The power of enjoyment in the enjoyer means Poru~a. They are quite distinct from each 
other. Why ? 
Tho reason is given to be thnt they are seen to be quite distinct from 
each other. The Yurusa possesses the characteristics of unchangeability, &C., the W& 
l 
to-know has the characteristics of changeability, Bio. 
They are, therefore, cpite'distinot 
from each other. It is meant to be said by this thnt although they appear to be identical 
they are not in reality the same. 'Are looked upon, as i t  were, to be one with each other. ' 
I 
This explains that this notion is an amiction. This employs the canon of agreement. 
l 
The cannon of difference is now applied :-' When, however, their natures are under- 
stood, &c. ' Understood means when the consciousness of 
discrimination has been 
attained. 

Now he shows that this is conceded by others also : --' And so if has been said' by 
Paiichaiikhb. ' Knowing the Purusa beyond the Will-to-know, &G.' 
Its nature is constant 
purity, itb. character ie indifference, its knowledie means intelligence. The f ill-to-know 
is impure, not indifferent and nowintelligent. The notion of self therein is Egoism and 
it is Nescience. Forgetfulness is the potency generated by former neseience. Or it may 
be the darkuess of inertia (tarnan), because Nescienca is born of the quality of inertia 
(tamas) ,-g. 
SCtra 7. 
Sukha, pleasure. 
W& knu4ay l, the sequential attraction to. m:' R&&, 
Y 
W 
attachment. 
7. Attachment. is the sequential attraction to pleas- 
sure. -88. 
ar a- 
V Y ~ G A .  
The desire to possess, the thirst for and the hankering after pleasure 
or the means thereof, preceded by a remembrance of the pleasure in one 
who has ell joyed it, is attachment.-58. 
VBCHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
On the attainment of discriminative knowledge, attachment, &C., are removed, Egoism, 
brought about by nescience, is the root of attachment, &c. For this reason he describes at- 
tachment, &C., after egoism. Attachment is tho sequential attraction to pleasuro. 
Memory is nbt possible to one who has not cognized. Hence is it said :-' In one 
who has enjoyed.' When pleasure is remembered, attachment is preceded by the remem- 
brance of t h e  pleasure in consequcncc of t h e  enjoyment thereof. When pleasure is being 
enjoyed there is no necessity of the remembrance. The attachment, however, to the means 
thereof, whether remembered or actually present, is also preceded by the remembrance 
of.the pleasure. A s  s matter of course wheu a means of pleasure is perceived, i t  is m- 
membered as a cause of the pleasure of the same class. Or it is inferred that it will cause 
d 
a pleasure similar to what has been before caused by an object,of the same class. The 
means of pleasure is, therefore, desired. 
He describes the meaning of the word attraction :-& 
The desire to possess, $0.'-7. 
1 
g:wpfi gq: Ilr;ll 
g:q Dubkha, pain. 
Anuiayli the sequential repulsion. *: Dvetab, 
* 
aversion. 
8. 
Aversion is the sequential repulsion from pain.-59. 
e 
I 
@ m 
W W 
TQhmt?n %$W W
:
 
Il c 11 
VYHSA. 
The repulsion, the anxiety, the wish for removal and the anger at 
pain and the means thereof, which stick in the mind in consequence of 

CH. II. 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 9. 
the feeling of pain, in the case of him m110 has felt the pain, preceded 
by a remembrance of the pain, is aversion. - 59. 
V
~
H
 
ASPATI'S GLOSS. 
"version is the sequential repulsion from pain-.' " One who has felt pain, b." This 
is to be explained as before. Describes the meaning of the words sequential repulsion 
from pain : -' The repulsion, &C.' 
Repulsion is the force which repels. Amplitice the 
same by stating synonyms :-' The anxiety, &C.'-& 
a w  Sva-rasa, by iG own potency. 
Vi%h,ht, flowing. fbgr: Vidueab, in 
the wise. fi Api, even. mn Tnth$, all the same. w: RQdhab, established. 
*: 
Abhiniveiab, love of life. 
9. Flowing on by its own potency, established a11 
the-same even in the wise, is Love of Life.--60. 
my=rra\ll 
VY&A. 
111 :dl living beings exists the &elf-benediction, ' would that I were 
never ti, cease. May J 1 ive on.' 
And this self-benediction cannot exist 
I 
in him mlro llns not experienced the nature of death. And by this the 
experience of n fonner life is inferrecl. This is the affliction of Love of 
Life, which flows by its own potency. 
That even n worm just born should know the fear of death, which 
is the same ar the l<nomledge of annild;ltion, and that this fear cannot be 
explained by percepti re, verbal and i nferen tial lrnomledge, leads to the 
inference tImt the pain of death has been experienced in n former life. 
And a s  this affliction is found existin'g in the extremely ignorant, so a.lsc 
is it established even in the wise, who have come to lrnow both the start- 
l 
ing a~id finishing ends of life. Why ? The residual potency having 
been brought about by an experience of the pain of deatl;, is necesssldy 
common to both of them, the knowing aud tile ignorant.-60. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
\ 
Explains the meaning of the words, Love of Life (abhinivek). ' In all living beings, 
&C.' 
This self-benediction, this desire with reference to one's self is constant. ' Would 
that I were never to cease t o  be.' ie., May I never become extinct. 
May I live on, i.e., 

PATAh7JAL18S YOQA. 
May 1 retain life.' And this self-benediction, this love of life, this Pear of death is not 
possible in a living being who has not experienced his liabilities to die. The unbeliever 
denies the faet of a previbus life. The author, therefore, takes the opportunity to refute 
him :-' And by this the experience of a former life, &C.' 
The experience of a former 
life is inferred, because t h e  present body is being maintained. Rirth means the coming 
into relationship with the experiences of a body, senses and mind which are new and 
which are specialized by a new coming together. Its experience means coming into 
contact therewith. That is inferred, How? Explains :-G 
This the love of life, &C.' 
Without completing the sentence says that is is an affliction : 
this affliction.' It is this 
love of life wnich through evil de&ls, Be., afflicts, i.e., gives pain to living beiiigs. It is, 
.., 
therefore, called an affliction. Finishes the sentence, L which flows on, &C.' 
The meaning is that it flows on by its own potency brought about by habituation, 
and is not external. Gives the reason, why it is not external even in the case of a worm 
which is just born, is full of pain and is of a very low type of intelligence. ' That even a 
worm just born, &C.' ' Can not be experienced ' means cannot be caused. This is the 
meaning. A child just born begins to shake when he sees a death-dealing object. The 
knowledge of death is inferred by his peculiar trembling. It is thereby found that he is 
afraid. Pear is seen as being caused by pain or the cause of pain. He has not exparienced 
death in this life. Neither has inferred or heard about it. The knowledge of the 
peculiar pain and of the particular cause thereof which is causiug pain at any moment 
is therefore a previous possessioti of his. All other means of the knowledge being ex- 
cluded, the only one that remains by the canon of residues, is memory. And this nlemory 
cannot exist without t h e  residual potency of s former experience. And inasmuch as 
there is no experience in khis birth, the experience of a former birth only remains as the 
cause proved to exist by the canon of residues. Por this reason there was certainly 
contact with a former birth. The word ' even ' necessitates a contact with something. 
Hence completes the meaning of the sentence by saying, ' And as. &C.' 
The extremely ignorant are those whose intelligence is very low. Explains'wis- 
dam :-l Who have come to know both the starting and fitlishing ends of life.' 
The end 
means the point. The world of experience is0 the first of the life of the Pnrusa. The 
final one is absolute freedom (baivalya). The wise are so called because they have come 
to know of this by verbal and inferential knowledge. 
The fear of death is then established in the worm on the one side and in the 
wise man on the other. The question arises that although the fear of death might well 
exist in an ignorant man, it is not proper that it should exist in the wise, inasmuch as 
in the latter's case it must have been uprooted by knowledge. And if it be said that it 
is not uprooted in this case, then the highest mmifest+tion of the quality of essentiality 
(sattva) must be absent from him. With this object puts the question, ' Why ?' Gives the 
answer. ' This residual potency, &C.. . .is common, &C.' 
The meaning is that the wise man is not he who has reached the state of the Cog- 
nitive trance, but only he who can discrirninlte by inftmnce and verbal knowledge.-B. 
Sfitra 10. 
ii Te, these. 
Prati-prasava, along with the passing. out of activity. 
W: Hey&, that are destroyed. F: SClkpQ, (when but) potential. 
10. These when but potential, are destroyed along 
with the passing 
- 
out of activity.--61, 
- - 

Clf. II. 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 11. 
.l 03 
These five afflictions, when their geed-power has, as it were, been 
burnt up, disappear of tliernselves along with that Yogi's mind, when 
having fulfilled the purpose of its existence, it becomes latent.-61. 
. 
The afflictions have been defined and they have been shown to be possessed of four 
states--the dormant, the tenuous, the alternated and the fully operative-all of which 
are to be destroyed. How is it that the author of the aphorism has notmentioned the 
fifth state of the afflictions, the potential, in which the seed-power is, as it were, burnt 
up ? For this reason says :-G 
They when but potelltial are destroy4 along with the 
passing out of activity.' 
That which falls within the sphere of man's effort is of course 
taught. The de~t~ruction 
of the potential state is 110t within t h e  sphere of mau's effort. 
It is, on the contrary, to be destroyed by the passing out of activity ; that is, by 
mind passing back into its causc, thc principle of egoism. 
C . 
Explains :-' These five, &C.' 
This is easy.-10. 
W DhyLna, by meditation. am: Hey&, that are destroyed. q Tad, their. 
nrp: Vrit tyab, modifications. 
1 I. Their modifications are destroved by medita- 
V 
tion.--62. 
. 
When, however, they exist as re taming their seed-power, their mo&- 
fications are destroyed by inedi tat ion. The modifications of the afgict,ions 
which are essential are at.tenuated by the Yoga of action 9 and having 
been so attenuated, are destroyed by the Ligh intellection of meditation, 
so that they are rendered potential, L e ,  their seed-power is, as it jvere, 
burnt up. 
As tl~e gross clirt'of clothes is at first shaken off, and then 
the fine dirt is w a s l d  off by, effort and appliance, so tile gross essential 
lnodificatioris need but s~nall antagonistic efforts, whereas tile potelltial 
ones need very powerful an tagonists.--62. 

Well then, when the ~Btictions have b~en~trttenusted 
by the Yoga of action, to what 
sphere should the effort of tho Puruia be directed, in order that they may be destroyed ? 
mr this reason says :-' When, however, they exist as retaining their seed-power, &C.' 
Differentiates them from the barren ones and reads the aphorism :-'Their 
modi- 
fications are destroyed by meditation.' 
Explains :-4 
The modifications of the sBictions, 
c 
They are called essential, becanse even though attenuated by the Yoga of action, 
they are further capable of destruction by being rendered incapable of producing effects 
and losing their very nature by mean8 of the mind resolving back into its cause. 
Mentions the limit of the effort of the Purup in the sphere of iutel1ection:-' 
SO 
that they are rendered potential.' 
Explains potentiality :-l 
Their eeerl-power has, as it were, been burnt up.' 
Gives 
an illustration of the same :--' As the gross dirt of clothes, &C.' 
Effort means washing, &c. Appliance means the use of washing ingredients. The 
illustration and the illustrated are snalogous only so far as they possess grosser and 
finer dirt, and not in their removability by eflort, because it is impossible in t h e  potential 
amictions, which disappear along with the mind resolving back h t o  its cause. 
Those that require but little effort for their removal are said t o  need smalf antago- 
nistic ingredients. Those that require tho agency ot very powerful causes for r e m  wal, 
are said to need very powerful antagonists. High intellection is described as small, 
because it is lower in comparison with the resolving of the mind into its own cause.-11. 
h Kleds, afflictione. F MQla, origin. 
KlePamQ1ab, Having its origin 
in afflictions. d Karma, of actions. M: Bdnyab, the vehicle. 
Drista, 
. visible. 
m Adyista, 
.. invisible. 
a ~ 1  
Janma, in births. 3qh: Vedaniyab, to be experienced. 
12. The vehicle of actions has its origin in afflictions, 
and is experienced in visible-and invisible births.-63: 
The vehicle of actions has its Crigin in a~ictions, and is experienced in visible and 
invisible births. 
Here the vehicle of good and bad actions is born oE lost, avarice, 
f~rgetfulness and anger. Its operation is felt in the vislble as well as 
4 
in the invisible birth. Of these, the vehicle of good actions, which is 

l 
cd. n. 
Oh! THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 12. 
105 
4 
supplemented by intense energv 
W in the shape of purificatory action, trance 
a d  repetition of mantra.aa, or, which is accompanied by devotion to the 
Lord, the devas, the great seers and other possessors of great power, ripens 
into fruit at once. Thiv lrappens in the sanle way in which, in the went of 
repeated evil done to men who are suffering the extreme misery of fear, 
disease and helplessness, or to those who place confidence in the evil-duel*, 
or to those who are high-minded and perform tapas, the vel~icle of evil-ac- 
tiom also ripens into fruit at once. 
A s  for example, the youth Nandidwara 
paswd out of the ,human form and was transformed into n gyl. As also 
Nnlqvt, the rulbr of t l ~ o  gods, passed out oE his own form and was trans- 
formed in to an animal. 
Of the vellicles oE action, that which culminates 
into the life of hell, is said to be experienced in the invisibleebirth. 
A s  to those wllose afflictions have been destroyed, the vellicle of 
actions is llot experic?nced in the invisible births:--63. 
Very .well, what afll ic ts the Puruya by causii~g life-time, life-state and life-experi~ce 
may be called an affliction. 
But i t  is the vehicle of actions that brings these about, 
not Ncscierrce aud the others. Why then are Nescience, &C., called afflictions ? For this 
reason says :-' The vehicle of actions has its origin i n  amictions, and is experienced in 
visible and invisible births.' 
It is so called because the afflictions are the roots out of 
which it is born and which bring out its operation.   he meaning is that inasmuch 
as the vehicle of action has its origin in Nescience, (BC., and is for that reason the cause 
of l ife-state, life-time and life-exp erience, they are called amictions. Explains :--6 
The 
vehicle of good and bad actions, &ce' That in which something lives is its vehicle. Here. 
t,he Purup,s in evolution are to be und,erstood as living in the vehicle of action$ (which 
is for t h e  reason called a vehicle). Virtue and vice rro the vehicles of actions. Virtue 
become; the callse of the epjoyment of heaven, &ce( when desirable actions are performed 
with desire. similarly, vice mavifests when such actiolls as the takiog away of other 
people's property are performed through avarice. The vice for which forgetfulness is 
responsible is such as the taking of the life of others in the belief that it is a virtue. 
The question arise8 that there is such a thing as virtue caused by forgetfulnesle 
and virtue caused by anger. An illustratioll .- 
may 
taken. from the fact of nhruva 
having been given the highest position in t h e  ~ t a r r y  
world Ona~collnt of the pure vehicle 
of action, brought about by the desire to conquor his father, due to anger born of hi8 
ill-treatment. As to vice caused by auger, why that ie well known, as it becoses the 
cause of people dealing death to Brilrma!las and others. 
Says that it is of two descriptions:--' It is experienced either in the visible, &o; 
Describes that which is experienced in the visible life :--' That which is brought about 
by, &C.' 
Gives ill us trations, r.eupectivel :--4 
As the youth Nandldwara, &C.' 
Of the vehicle of action which culminates in tho life of hell :' The makers of the 
vehicle of action which takes to the hells known as Hambhipikct, &C., are spoken of as 
lendiug to the life of hell.' 
The vehiele of action formed thereby is not experienced in 
the visible life. It is not possible that by rnesnx of the human body which is the conse- 
quent form thereof, resicliu like that should bc lived out, even by the Constant 
suffering of thousands of years, The rest is easy.--1%. 
14 

PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
106 
! 
--- 
I 
4 
?lf&f?~* 
TRW?@~?~: 11 9 P 11 
/ 
1 / 
& Sati, if existing. 
2% & M e ,  be the root. 
AT Tad, its. h: 
VipAka,b, 
ripening. arR Jlti, life-state. 
&wh, life-time. %: Blmga, life-expel-ience, 
all these three. 
13. It ripens into life-stLate, life-experience and life- 
time, if the root exists.-64. 
uPd q3 afi;w+ir wmgvirlr: I -:U U $35 arrf&r ftw~rn* V& 
a
:
 
l 9.m gTlqqrGg: ?&mqsr aqWib4rm a*cmorf 
wak m 3 q w  pMawrar m am $maaq: ~afn% #mm 
uaEt w6tita$& 51 ~
u
~
F
T
~
~
~
~
~
~
?
3eir I U a hmbm 
dh@h 
8Pa I aicf f~ar$h I kit% 
di W,PT 
ww: KIWR& 
sdi3- 
ii; mnf&~firh 
I &am ft~fw 
~ d a *  
~
s
r
 
a4hk WT* 
h 
~ 8 %  
5F;q R$&71~%& I ? m;rw Q
~
K
~
 
3;41: STTmq I ~ F ~ I ~ ~ T ~ W
aA~~mr&hw~d$r~w 
th: 
~M%s'fzl ilmmhuija~dardr h
~
q
m m :  
I a a r R ~  I ;T &i m f h w  wm: mq I TFRT+~%~ sfig 
&sirq Wlfa~~i3q : 
?il~rnhsam 
l 
a m :  U 

qYnqa rch 11 99 1 
V Y ~ S A .  
The vehicle of actions begins to ripen into fruit when the afflic- 
tions exist ; not wllen the amictions have been rooted out. 
As the rice 
in the paddy has t l ~ e  power to grow only so long as the chaff remains 
attached thereto and tlleir seed-power is not burnt up, not when the chaff 
'has been removed ; scr also does the vehicle of actions grow into ripeness, 
when the afflictions are attached to it, and when its ~ e e d - ~ o w e r  
has not 
been burnt np 1:)y intellection ; not when the nflictions hare been removed. 
The fruition is of three descriptions, life-state, lifetime and life- 
experience. The following has to be considered in this connection. Is 
one action the came of one life ? ' Or, does it bring about more li ves than 
r 
une? 
i'he second clnestiou is this. DO more actions than one bring 
about more lives than one ; or do t,hey bring about one life only? 
It is not that one action only is the cause of one life only. Why ? 
Because in that case there mould be no regularity of auccession in the 
fruition oE present actions ancl those that are being heaped up eternally 
a t d  some of mllicll still remain unconsurnecl ; and thus the world-would 
lose all patience. This, lmwever, is not the desired end. 
Nor is one action the cause of more lives than one. 'Why? There 
beiog more actions than one, it would necessady follow that one action 
requiring more lives tlmn one for fruitioli, there would remain no time 
for the huition of the reinnincler. That aiso is not a desirable end. 
Nor again are more actions than one, the cause of more lives than 
one. 
Why ? It is impossible that all of them should exist at once, and 
it must, therefore, be said that if such a thing be possible it can only be 
in succession that SO many lives can manifest.' And in this latter case 
the defect already stated is apparent. 
For this reason, the vehicle of the entire colhction oE good and 
bad actions doxle in the interval between birth and death, stands in all 
its variety 1x4 th every action attached to one ruling factor of one life. This 
is brought into ~uanifestation by death, is joined together by oue link 
which a t  the time bllings about death and thus causes but one life. 
The period of this life is limited by this very action. Diwing the 
life-priod all experience i s  &O 
caused by that very action alone, 
This 

108 
PATANJALI'S YOQA. 
vehicle ~f~actions 
is said to possess a three-fold fruition, causing as it does 
the ~nanifesta tion of life-B tate, l ife-period and l i fe-experie nce. 
For this reason the rehicle of nc tions is terrned un i-gert ital (Elralh A- 
vilrrt), causing one birth only. 
That, however, which is experienced in the visible life only, may 
bring about but a single fruition, as causing life-experience ; or, double 
fruition as c:rusing life-experience and life-period ; or, a triple fruition 
ss causing life-experience, life-period and l ife-state. It may be like Nan- 
didmara or like Nahusa. 
This mind, however, is as it were, variously coloured, all though on 
account of its becoming pervaded from eternity by the residua of the 
experiences of afflictions, actions and fruitions ; a.nd as such looks like 
a fishing net pervaded all over xith knots. These, therefore, must have 
been brought about by more (previous) lives th:m one. 
It is this vehicle of actions which has been termed uni-genital (Eka- 
bhfivika), causing one birth only 9 and the potencies which as residna 
- 
cause memory, exist from eternity. 
Further the uni-genital (EkabhAvilra) vehicle of actions is either of 
appointed or of unappointed fruition. The rule applies to that portion 
only wllich has to be experienced in the visible life and whose fruition 
has been appointed. 
T t does not apply to t&llat which has to be expe- 
rienced in an irlrisi ble life an (1 wl,ose fruition has not been a ppohted. 
Why? Because, that wllich has to be experienced in an invisible life and 
whose fruition has not been appointed, 1ms n three-fold end. It may be 
destroyed witllout fruition. It may become merged in the rnling action. 
It may live on for g long tilne overpowered by the ruling action whose 
fruition llns been appointed. 
Of these, the clestru~tion of an action (lone takes place without frui- 
tion in this way that the black actions are destroyed by the rise of the 
white actions. Thefollowi~lg has been said on thissubject:- 
' Two and two the actions, know, 
' Of him that evil does 
One heap of virtue kills ; 
To do good actions therefore tend ; 
The wise such actions tell.' 
As to mergence in the ruling action, the following has been said on 
t 
the subject :- A little mixture of evil may be easily removed or borne ; 
it cannot do away with the good.' 
Why ? ' There is much of the good 
for me, mixed wherewith it inay cause some insignificant diminution 
even in heaven.' 

CR. If. 
ON THE PRACI'ICE OF YOG.4, 13. 
109 
-p- 
I 
And now how may it live on for a long time, overpowed by the 
ruling action whose fruition lms been appoin tetl ? 
1)eath is said to be 
-the t m s e  of the sin1111 tnneons sppemanco of the actions .whose fruit.ion Ilas 
been appointed and which are to be experienceil in the invisible birth, not 
that of the actions mllicll although to be expctrienced in the invisible birth, 
yet whose fruition has not been sppoin ted. The actions whose fruition has 
iwt bceu determined upon, may either he clestroyecl or get mixed up, or 
stand unfructified for a long time, ovkrpomercd so long as sirnilar actians 
competent to bring the cause of manifestation into play, do not incline 
it towards fruition. It is because the time, the place and the cause of 
manifestation are not cletermined that the working of karma is variegated 
:md difficult to know. 
Tnnsmnch as the rule is not abolished by 
the exception, the vehicle of actious is recognized as causing olle birth 
Let it bo so, seeing that the vehicle of actions has its origin in'Nescienco. 
Let it 
also be granted that on t h e  destruction of Noscience being brought about by the birth 
of bnowledge, there should not come into existence another vehicle of actions. But the 
oldkeLiaIes of actlion which have been laid by in m eternal succession of innumerable 
lives, and the times of whose fruition have not been appointed, are impossible to Bnish 
off by esperience and thus the chain of repeated births becomes interminable. For this 
reason he (Jays :-' It ripens into life-state, life-experience and life-period if the root exists.' 
The meaning is this. The vehicle of actions fructifies illto pleasure and pain only. Life- 
state m d  life-period also are meant to fulfil that object and not t.0 put in an obstacle 
thereta Pleasure and pain follow in tho wake of attachment and aversion, never exist 
in separation from them and cannot exist without them. 
A ud it is not possible that if 
any one is attached or averse to anything, he will not feel pleasure and pain respectively 
in contact with that thing. For this reason thc mental plane becomes a Aeld for the 
production of the fruit of actions only when it is watered by the stream of t h e  afflictions, 
4 
Hence tile affli~t~ions 
help the vehicle of actions in the productio~l of their fr~lits also. It 
is for this resson that when the afHictions ore destroyed, the power which helps to bring 
about the manifestation also disappears; and on that account, the vehicle of actions 
although existing, being innumerable and having no time for its fruitiou appoin t d ,  
does not possess the power of prodncing fruit, because its seed-power has been destroyed 
by high intellection. 
The Commentary makes the same subject clear :-' The vehicle of actions begins 
to ripen when the afflictions exist.' 
Illustrates the same :-' As the rice in the paddy, 
&C.,' eveu though covered by the chaff, their seed-power should not have been burnt 
up by heat, &C., before they can sprout. Applie~ the illustration to the illustrated :-',90 
also, La.' 
The question arises that t h e  afflictions can never be destroyed, because nothing 
that exists can be destroyed. For this reason says :--'And not when the seed-power 
has been burnt up by intellection.' 
Mentions three. descriptions of fruition:-' 
This fruition is, &C.' 
Fruit is that into - 
which the actions ripen. 
The first discussion relates to the unity or multiplicity of lives as the result of a 
single action taken ae the otarting point. The second discussion refers to the unity or 

multiplicity of lives caused by nloro actions than one taken as thc starting point. Thus 
there are four options. Refutes the first of these options :-4 
One action iu not the 
cause of ono life.' 
Question :-'Why 
?' 
Tho ansrvw is this. Actions have been laid 
by from eternity in each life. Thcy are for this very reason innumerable. It a single 
life exhausts one action orlly, many a one remains unexhmsted. 
To this are to be added ' 
t h e  actions of t h e  present life. 'rhere will thus be no role for the successive fruition 
of actions. As a necessary resi~lt there will be no comfort for-the world, and this is. not 
desirable. The meaning is that when the actions that are exhausted are only isolated 
ones, and those that are being boru are many, the vehicles of notion will run into each 
other in confusion. They will keep h i n g  constantly born in aninterrupted succession, 
but there being no law for their fruition, there will he 110 comfort for men. It will be 
impossible for intelligent people b detcrlnine the order of their fruition, and thus there1 
will be no satisfaction in the performance of virtuous actions. 
He refutes the second alternative :-' Nor is one the cause of more lives than one,' 
Question:--' Why?' The answer is this :--If one action out of those that have been laid 
by in many lives, becomes the canso of bringing abont many lives, then the actions that 
remain unexhausted will be mally more, arid t h e  result will be that there will be no time 
available for their frnition. That also is useless, because the performance of ac tiona 
having. thus become useless, no one mill attend to bhem. When on account of there being 
no rule for the succession of fruition, satisfactiw disappears in case of one action only 
being considered erhaustiblo in one life, what llentioll is to be made of the option in which 
one action is oonsidcred as eshxi~arlstible in more lives than one. In this case thero will be no 
opportunity and no time available for the fruition of any present actions that may be done. 
apparent here also. 
Three alternatives having thus been refuted, tho only one that remains available 
by the canon of rcsidaes, is the last :--l More actions than one are the cause of.one life.' 
For this reason he says :--' The vehicle, &c,' 
The interval betweell birth and death' is the period of life which falls between 
the two events, birth and death on either side. 
In all its variety' rneans variegated by the presentations of the fruits of actions 
in the shape of pleasure and pain. 
The ruling factor of life is that which is ill 'evidence above all and which fructifies 
in immediate succession. 
' The action merged into' is that which fructifios sometime aloug with it. Death means 
passing beyond the prosent life I t  is by that, that tllc vehicle ot actions is brought into 
This means that it is inclined towards the bringil~g about of itis effect,^. 
' Is joined together by ono link' :-IS 
brought into t h e  state of one active force, 
working towards the bringing about of its effects in the shape of birth, &a. It thus 
causes one birth only, not more than one. This birth is as man, &c. The period of each 
snch life is determiwd bp that very karma. Each life has its appointed limit, with 
difference in time. During that- life-period the enjorment 
W 
of pleasure and pain is br ~ g h t  
about by that very harm, being as it i s  related thereto. For this reason the vehicle of 

CB. IT. 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 18. 
111 
actions is said to cause three fruitions, causing as it does life-state, life-period and life- 
experienae. The author sulnmarizes thc general rule:--'For 
this reason the vehicle of 
actions is termed uni-natal' or t~nigental (ekabhdvika). The meaning is that its maui- 
festation is limited to one birth only. 
Having thus described the three-fold fraitioa of the one-birth vehicle as being 
e 
the general rule, he now differentiates the three-fold fruition of the.present karma, the 
one that is experienced in the visible life 
That; however, which is experienced in the 
visible life only, &C.' I n  tl!e case of ~andiswsra, whose human life was broken off at the 
. age of eight, the special virtne which on account of high energy and intense application, 
became the cause thereof, resulted in tbe double frliition of life-state and life-experience. 
In the case of Nahup, however, the period of life being already determined by the karma 
which determined his attainment of the position of Indra, his antagonistic action of 
kicking Agastya, resulted only in his ekperience of the resubt of the vice. 
The question arises, Have the residiia of alBictions and the residua brought about 
by the exgeriences of the fruitions of actions causing similar enjoyments, their fruition 
ill oilc life only, just as the one-birth vehicle of actions has ? Ifor if i t  be so, a man passing 
into the animal state of life woi~ld nob have the experiences which are suited to that 
state of life alone. For this reason he snjs :-' The mind, however, is as i t  were variously 
coloured, &c,' 
* 
Pervaded from eternity' rncans unified into a single manifestatGa of oncrgy. 
Now he describes the nature of resicha in order to differentiate virtue from vice. 'And 
the. poteigies which as residua, &C.' 
The author introduces now the discussion of occasional exceptions to the geileral 
rule of the vehicle of aetioiis causing one-birth o l l l ~ .  ' The vehicle of actions, however, 
&ce' The word however ' differentiates i t  from the residual potencies. The rule of 
causing.one birth only applies oilly to the vehicle whose fruition is to be experienced 
in tllo visible life ouly, aud whose fruition has been aplmillted. It does not apply to that 
which has to be erperienced in an invisible life, and whose fruitioli has not yet been 
appointed. He asks the reason therefore :- 
Why ?' 
and mentions the reason :-'Because 
that which has to be experienced, &C.; 
The author mentions now One of the three ends :-' It may be destroyed without, 
fruition.' 
%lentions the soco:ld :-' It may be merged in, &C.' 
Bfentions the third :-A 16 
may live on for a verg long time, &C." 
Of these. he divides the first :-' Of these the destruction of an action done without 
Z 
fruition, &C.' 
There are only three kinds of actions, the white, the black and the white-black, 
besides the actions of a SannyPsi, which are lleither whiten or black. Kow here t h e  white 
vehicle of actions brought about by purific;rtorY ~ t i o n  
allcl study, &C., becomes, as soon 
as i t  arises, the destroyer of the black one, which has not begun to fructify. 
I t  should also be understood that it destroys t h e  white-black one too, there .being 
similarity on accoilnt of the presence of the black one in that. His reverence quotes 
the Veda on this very subject :--' 
The following has been ssid, &C.' 
' Two and two the 
actions, &C.' 
Tile two and two actions are the white and the wlrite-black. This is related to the 
verb ' kills: 
The word two ' is used twEce to indicate ~-~anifoldncss. 
Of whom are these 
two-fold actions ? Of the man who does the evil. What is that which kills ? The allswer 
is :-' T11o hcap of the good actions of him 'who does good deeds.' 
B e   peaks of a heal, 
because a heap can be managed by a heap only. This makes out the white vehicle of ac- 
tions to be the third one. The meaning is that the whit6 vehicle of a&ons which is brought 
into being by the performance of such actions as avoid causing pain to others, is of such 

-a nature that although one, it dertrops t h e  contrary vehicles of black and white-black 
actions, although they may be msny. For this reason they tend, i.e., incline towards 
good actions, such as the wise men tonch. Here it is a very high class virtue, this rise 
of white actions, that destroys others. 
It is not by the pain con~equeiit upon study, &C., that they are destroyed. It is 
not pain gztcc pain that is contrary to vice. It is contrary to that pain only which is 
brought about by vice itself. The pain which ~ccompaniev study, &c , is not brought 
about by vice. If i t  were sol t h e  ordinances of study, &C., would be useless, because in 
that case vice would be born out of tho very strength of t h e  stndy, &C., ordained Bur- 
ther t h e  pain which accompai~ics study, &C., is not caused by them. If it were caused 
by them, the recornmei~c1ation of stady. &C., would bocoine useless, because the more 
intense the application to study, &C.. 
the more would tllos be the pain caused thereby. 
If no pain be caused by tlhe application to study, &C., thus recornmerrded, why then the 
hellish states of Kumbhipbka, &C., m:ly also be recommended as desirable, because in 
that cilse it would appear to be only on sccmnt of their not being rccomrne~~ded 
ns desir- 
able that pain would 11ot be producccl. Everything, therefore, runs into all four corrrers 
(i.e., nothing is well established io its own right place aiid is therefore absurd). 
The author divides now the second end (of actions):-111 tho ruling adion HUC& BY 
the, sacrifice of Jyoti$toma, &C., ik minor ~ c t i o w  such as the killing of animals, &C., are 
merged as parts ifi the whole. 
The killing of animals, &C., has two effects. The first is that being ordained as part 
of the principal rtcbion, it helps in its fulfilment. The sccond is that the causing of 
pain to all living beings being forbidden, it results in undesirable cmsequences. Of 
these when it is performed only as subsidiary to the principal action, then, for that 
very reason, it doe3 not manifest its result all a t  once independently of the principal 
action. On the contrary it keeps its position of an accessory only and manifests only 
when the fruition of the principal ruling action begins. It is said to be tacked 011 to the 
ruling action, when, while helping the rdhg ac tion, it exists only as the seed of its own 
proper effect. PuichsiikhL has said the following on the subject :-' A little mixture.' 
, When the ruling fi~ctorof 
the prasmt karma born from the sacrifice of Jyotistoma, &C., 
. . 
is mixed up with the present cause of evil, it may be easily removed. It is possible of 
removal by a sinall expiatory sacrifice. h e n  if an expiatory sacrifice be not performed 
by carelessness, the subsidiary action would ripen at the time of the ripening .of the 
principal only, and in that case the evil generated thereby would be easy to bear. The 
wise who are taking their baths in tho great lake of the nectar of pleasure brought about 
by a collection of gjod actions, put up easily with a small piece of the fire of pail1 produced 
by a small evil. It is not, therefore, capable of dimiuishing, i.e., appreciably lessening 
the effect, of the good, i.e., of bis large virtues. 
He puts t-he question :--' Why 5' The answer is put into tho mouth of the virtuous 
man :-' There is ~nuch other good for me,' which stands apart a s  a consequence of the frui- 
tion of the pri ncipal factor of action beginning with the taking of the vow of sacri6co and 
ending with the distributionof charities. With that there will be a little of the admixture 
of evil. Even in heaven which iu considered as free from all pain, the en joytnent is the 
result of virtue. mixed up with a little of vice and there will, therefore, be .a somewhat 
inappreciable climinutim of enjoyment only. 
He divides the third alternative :--' How may it optionally live on, &C.' 
The ruling 
action here means the most powerful oae, not the whole cousisting of mally parts. ' The 
WHJ~ powerful' is that whose fruition has been appointed with regard to time, hasuse 
there remains no other opportunity for its fruitioo: That whose trhition has not b
n
 
appointed ie considered weak, inasmuch as there ie opportunity for its fruition at other 

ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 14. 
times. 
Living on for a very .long time ' is in the seed state only, not as helper of the 
principal action, that being independent. 
The question arises. It has been said that the vehicle of actions manifeste at once 
at the time of death. It is now* said that it lives on for a very long t i m e  overpowered. How 
is it that the former is not cpntrary to the latter ? With this object he puts the question : 
--' How may it, &C.' 
The answer is :-g 
Death is said to be the cause of the simultaneous 
>appearance, &C.' 
The singalar denotes the olass. 
Now he lays down that what has beon said applies to the other as well.- 
Not that 
of the action, &C.' 
The rest is easy.-13. 
SBtra 14. 
il Te 9 they. 
Hliida, pleasure. 
ParitBpa, pain. W: PhaMh, 
fruits. m-*-: 
Hladaparitapaphakh, Having pleasure and pain as fruits. F 
Pupya, virtue. v Apuvya, vice. 
Hetu, reason. 
Pur?yaput!yaw 
hetutvat, Because virtue and vice are their causee. 
14. They have pleasure or pain as the fruit, 
- 
by reason 
of virtue or vice.-65. 
They, i.e., life-state, life-period and life-experience, have pleasure 
for their fruit, when caused by virtue, and have pain for their fruit when 
caused by vice. 
As pain consists in what is contrary to the prevalent mental tenden- 
cies at a time, there must be pain to the.YogP9s mind even at the time of 
the enjoyment of pleasurable objects.-65. 
v ~ X I A B P A T ~ ~  
GLOSS. 
It has been said that karma has its origin in afflictiohs. It has also been said that the 
huitions have their origin in actions (karma). Now the question is of what are the 
fruitions the origin, so that they too have to be given up ? For this reason he says :- 
They have pleasure or pain as their fruit, by reason of virtue and vice.' Explains :-' They, 
f .e., life-state, &o.' 
Although life-state and life-period only have pleasure and pain as their fruit, inarr 
much aa those come before these, and not so life-experience, inasmuch ae that comes 
after pleasure and pain have arisen, and inasmuch as it consists in the very experience 
thereof, yet that too is spoken of as the fruit of enjoyment, because being perceivable 
and enjoyable, it is an object of the act of enjoyment. 
The question arises that although the life-state, life-experience and life-period 
caused by vice and causing pain may well be regarded as removable, being found to be 
contrary, why should those be given up which haye been caused by virtue and cause 
pleoeare ? They are seen to bo moving along the proper line. It is impossible that even 
, 
p r thownd infernnoes and so-called authbritative etatemenb should do away with the 
16 
C 

114 
PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
fact of their moving along the line of every individual mind. Nor are pleasure and pain 
aossible 
- 
of existence the one without the other, inasmuch as when pleasure is taken up, 
pain too is there as not to be given up, as they have different causes and different appear- 
ances. For this reason he says :--' And as this pain, &c '-14. 
SQtra 15. 
i 
Paripbma, of change. m TBpa, anxiety. h 
Samskbra, habituation. 
\ 
$3: Duhkhaib, by reason of the pains. 
Gupa, of the qualities. &: Vrittih, 
of the functionings. m 
Virodhb, by reason of the contrariety. 
V Cha, and, 
3 : ~ .  
Duhkham, pain. w Eva, indeed. &y Sarvam, all. 63%: Vivekinab, to the 
discriminating. 
15. By reason of the pains of change, anxiety and 

CR. 71. 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 15. 
115 
VYHSA. 
a 
How is that possible ? ' By reason of thehains, he.' The feeling 
of pleasure depending upon the enjoyment of intelligent and non-intelli- 
gent objects, is in the case of every one followed bv 
W attachment. Here 
the vehicle of actions is born out of attachment. 
Further inasmuch as 
there is aversion to the causes of pain and also delusion, there exists also 
the vehicle of actions brmght about by aversion and delusion. And so 
it has been said :-' Enjoyment is not possible without giving psi11 to 
beings. 
There is also the physical vehicle of actions caused by giving 
pain to others. 
It has been said that the pleasure of enjoyment is Nescience. The 
calming down of the powers of action, sensation and thought, which 
comes in consequence of the satisfaction derived from enjoyment of their 
objects, is pleasure. The activity iu consequence oE want of satisfaction 
is pain. 
Further, it is uot possible to make the powers of action, &c,, free 
from desire by the frequent repetition of en joyments, because attachment 
increases in consequence of the repetition of enjoyments, and so also doe8 
the dexterity of the powers. The repetition of enjoyment is, therefore, 
no cause of pleasure. Whoever desiring pleasure enjoys certain objects 
and thus becomes addicted to them, in consequence, and having become 
addicted thus becomes entangled in the morass of pah, is like one who 
brhg afraid of the bite of a scorpion, is bitten by a serpent. 
This is the pain of change. In the state of pleasure even, it pro- 
duces a contrary effect and thus afflicts a Yogt alone. 
I 

Well, what is the painfulness of anxiety ? The feeling of pain in 
depending upon intelligent and non-intelligent objects is in the case 
of every one followed by aversion. Here the vehicle QE action is born 
out of aversion. Whoever desires objects of pleasure, acts with his mind, 
bodv 
,> and speech and thereby favours <;me and disfavours others. He thus 
lays bv 
C, virtue and vice by favours and disfavours show9 to others. This 
is a vehicle of actions brought about by avarice and delusion. This is 
termed the painfulness of consequent suffering (tiipa). 
What again is the painfulness of habituation ? By the enjoyment 
of pleasure comes into being the vehicle of the potency of pleasure. 
By the 
feeling of pain comes the vehicle oE the potdncy of pain. 
By thus 
experiencing the fruition of actions in the shape of pleasures and pains, 
the vehicle cf actions grows. 
b 
This is the eternal stream of painfulness rvhicli thus flowing on 
frightens the Yogi alone. Why the Yogi alone ? Because the wise have 
in this case a similarity to the eye-ball. 
As a thread of wool throrvn 
into the eye pains by mere touch, but not so by coming into contact with 
any other organ, so do these pains afflict the Yogi tender as the eye-ball, 
but not anyone else whom thev 
W reach. 
t 
As to others, however, who give up the pain they have again and 
again taken up as the consequence of their owa karma, and who again 
take it up after having repeatedly given it up ; who are all- round as it 
mere pierced through by Nescience, possessed as they are of a mind full 
of afflictions, variegated by eterhal residua ; ~ ~ h o  
follow in the make of 
the ' I ' and the ' Mhe,' in relation to things that should be left apart,- 
the three-fold pain caused by both external ar.d internal means, r u n  after 
them as they are repeatedly born. The Yogi then seeing llimsell and the 
world of living beings thus surrounded by the eternal flow of pain, turns 
for refuge to right knowledge, the cause of the destruction of all pains. 
Further, by reason oE the contrariety of the functionings of the 
qualities, 'all i~ indeed pain to the discriminating.' 
The qualities of the 
Will-to-know being of the nature of essentiality, activity and inactivity, 
become dependent upon mutual help, and set tlle formatiou of either a 
,' 
quiescent, a disturbed or a delusive notion possessed of thc three qualities 
themselves. And the fumtioning of tllc qualities being changeful, the 
mind is said to possess the nature of changing quickly. The in tensities 
of their natures and the intensities of their fnnctionings are contradictory 
to one another. The ordinary, liomever, function together wit11 the in tense. 
Thus do these. qualities bring about the notions of pleasure, pain and 
. 

CH. I L  
I 
ON TEE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 15. 
117 
delusion by each aub'serving the others, and all thus enter in to the for- 
mations of the others. It is bv - the quality which is the leading factor, 
that the difference is introduced. It is for' this reason that all is pain to 
the discriminating. 
1 
The eeed but of which tl~ie large heap of pains grows ia Neseience, 
and of that the means of destruction is right knowledge. 
As the Science of Bfedicine has four Departments, Disease, the Cawe 
of Disease, the Absence of Disease, and Medicine or the Means of Removal, 
so 8180 this Science has four Departments. It is thus divided: the 
Universe in Evolution, the Cause of the Universe in Evolution, Liberation, 
the Means of Liberation. Of these, the Universe in Evolution being full of 
troubles is the pain to be avoided; the conjunction of the 'Purusn (the 
conscious principle) and the Prakriti is the cause of pain ; the final 
cessation of the conjunction is the removal of pain. Right knowledge 
is the cause of the removal of the pain. 
Here tlie individuality of the 
remover is not to be considered the pain to be avoided ; nor is to be 
considered ss an object of desire to be aimed at. In the case of avoidab,i- 
lity, the theory of their destructibility would come in. In the case of 
its being considered an object of desire to be aimed at, the theory of its 
being the effect of gome preceding cause mould come in. When both ' 
these positions have been given up, the theory of eternal immutability 
only remains. This is the Right knowledge. 
Thus is the Science said to possess four Depart~nen 
ts. - 
66. 
VACHABPATITI GLOSS. 
The author introdnces the aphoriem by putting a question with the object of ex- 
plaining in khe sequence, that although ordinary people do not at the t i m e  of feeling 
pleasure, have- the sense of its contrariety to the mind, aud do not, therefore, feel tbo pain 
thereof, the Yogi has thc sense of pain therein :-' How is that poaeible?' 'By means, 
&c: 
This is the aphorism. The oonsequential change, the suffering (t4pa) and the 
r\abiiystion are themselves pains. It is by means of theee, &c. 
He describes the painfulness of an object on account of the 
of sequential 
change :-'This 
feeling of pleasure ... ... in the case of every one, &C.' 
It is plain that 
pleasurg is not possible without the consequent bond of attachment.. Where there is no 
CO-existerrce thore is no pleasure. It is in thst that the feeling of pleasure consists. Attach- 
ment csusee activity. Activity is responsible for the heaping up of virtues and vices. 
Of those consf sts the vehicle of actions born out of attachments, because nothing thst 
does not exist cannot be born. He who enjoys pleasure and is at the time even devoted 
to it, goes on at the same time hating the causes of pain, by means of the mental modiflea- 
tions of aversion which exists distinct and independent. When one becomes incapable of 
removing tlm causes of pain, he becomes deluded forgetting as ho does the true nature of 
things. 
Thus atvehicle of actions is bronght'into being by aversion also, and like aversion 
by delusion also. This is but another name of Unreal Cognition. There is, therefore, U+ 
thing coutradiotoq in its being the cause d the vehicle of action comiqQ~to existence. 

The quwtlon a r i w  : How can <me who ir attached, be at the rame t i m e  averse and 
deluded ? Aversion and delasion an, not seen a t  the time of attachment. For this nuson 
he says :A And eo it has been said :' by us mhon speaking of the characteristic of alternib 
/ 
tion in the aflictiona. The virtue and vice which have their origin in the activity of 
l 
speech and mind have both been described by what h 
beon said so far, because the 
1 
incident of their being born out of attachment, &C., is common to both, inasmuch as there 
is no diffarence in this matter betweon a menbl and verbal expression of desire. As they 
say :-' The mental modification of desire differs not from its verbal exprwion.' 
Now he shows that there is a physical vehicle of actlone also :-' Enjoyment is not 
/ 
pos~ible without giving pain to gthers! 
It 
for this reason that the writers of the 
- 
DharmaABstms speak of the frve sins of householders. 
i 
It may be so. But it is, not proper that the plearurc derived from an object of enjoy- 
ment should be denied on ahcornt of this contmriety to tho feeling of Yogis. Ror thie 
reason he says :--' It has lhen said that the pleasure of enjoyment is Nescience,' when 
describing Nescience as cdnaisting of t h e  four-fold unreality of cognition. The eldera do 
not look with favour up013 mere consequential conditions. 
- 
There iis, of course, no feeling 
of pleasure caused to r?lyone by tho enjoymont of hohey mixed up with poison, even 
though he may use it. . On the contrary, there is a feeling of pain in the seqnence. FIo 
also has it been said bp the Lord :-' The pleasure which is felt by tho contaot of the 
senses with their objdcts, that which is like nectar in the beginning and like poison in 
the end, is Ril jar ic p~easnre.'--(Oitfi.) 
/ 
He introduces this : 
--g 
Tho calming down, &C.' We do not hold that pleasure consists 
in the enjoyment pf an objeot. On the contrary, the greatest pain of man consirta in the 
desire for ohjeotd, of men, who being eatisfind by objeota are pained by the wish to posstw 
them. 
This &.h 
not calm down without the enjoyment of the objeet. Porther, its . 
calming down does not come about, being followed as it is by attachment, &o. 
Why then 
ahonld it 
be considered'as the pain of conseqnenee? This ie the meaning. &tigfootion. 
is cou3Ad by the cessation of the thirst fop m object. The calming down thus oamd 
consists in the cessation of the powers from their work. The author shows thie very mean- 
ing by means of the canon of difference :-' The rwtleasneae in conseqnenoe of abenoe 
of satisfaction is pain .' 
He refutes :-' Farther it is not possible, &C.' 
It is true that the ceeertion sf d ~ i r e  
is tho fanltless pleasare. It io not the repitition of enjoyments, however, that brings this 
about. The repetition of enjoyment, on the contrary, brings about tile maniteetrtion of 
deaire, which is the opposite of the cerrsation thereof. As they have said :-' The desire 
for enjoymonts is not calmed down by their enjoyment. It gathers strength like fire .by 
oblations,'-(Mann). 
The rest is not--diBcnlt. 
- - 
NOW he quegtions about the pain of anxiety :--'Well, 
what ia the painfulness of 
anxiety I' 
He givas the answer :-' The feeling of pain, b.' The full description of its 
nature has rrot been undertaken, because it is well known to all men, It is similar to the 
pain of consequence or seqnential chimge. The details of this are the same 
those 
of t h e  other. 
He now questions a b u t  the painfulness of habitnation :-' What again, &C.' 
Answem :- 
a By the enjoyment of p l e ~ u r e ,  
&C.' The feeling of pleasure nourishes its residual potency. 
That brings about the memory of pleasure. That again causes attachment. From this 
Zollow the movements of mind, body and speech. The89 canse virtue and vice, Tbence 
comes the enjoyment of their fruition. Thence again is the mind habituated to it. Thio 
is the meaning of eternity, absence of beginning. And here again memory comes in by 
the intensity of the potencies of pleasure and pain. Thereby como attachment and 
aversion. Thence come actions. From actions proceeds traition. Thua should thi8 b 

CH. 11. 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 15. 
119 
4 
understood. E'ollowing thus this stream of pain trouble8 hhe Yogi alone, not any one else. 
For this : >ason he says :-' This is the eternal stream, &C.' As to others the three-fold pain 
runs after them .... this is the construction. The pains caused by other beings and the 
powers of nature am described by one common characteristic, the external. The modifb 
cations variegated by the eternal residua are described as the Nesciencb. If is the 
Nescience which causes modifications in the mind ; they are, in fact, Nescienoe itself. It 
is by this that the feelings of ' This is myself ' and ' This is mine ' am generated in the 
Will-to-be the sense; and the body, &C., and in wife and children, &c. These are the lines 
along which the ordinary Purusa moves. 
Under these circumstances t h e r j  is no rescue at all except in right knowledge. 
For 
thie reason he says :-' The Yogi then, &C.' 
Having thus shown the painfulness of pleasurable enjoyrnents, on account of the 
surrounding circumstances of sequential change, habithation and anxiety, he now shows- 
the painfulness due to t h e  very nature of their being :-' Further by reason of the con- 
trariety of the functionings of the qualities, &C.' He explains :-' The qualities of Essence 
(Sattva), disturbing energy (Rajas) and inertia (Tarnas) evolved as essentiality, activity 
and inactivity in their transformation as the Will-to-be, being dependent for support 
upon each other, bring about every notion, even though it be the notion of pleasurable 
enjoyments, as necessarily possessed of the three qualities, being as it is as such, either 
quiescent, that is pleasurahie, disturbed, i. e., painful or inert, i. e., seedy (a feeling which 
is neither of active pleasure nor yet of paiu). And even such a aodification in the form 
of a notion of this R7ill-to-be is hot permanent. So says he :-'And 
t h e  functioniug of the 
qualities being changefd, &C.' The mind has been said t o  be of a quickly changing nature. 
But how can one notion become possessed of the opposite qualities of quiescence, 
disturbance and seediness at one time ? For this reason he says :-' The intensities of 
their nature and the intensities of their functionings are contradictory to one another.' 
Natures differ from natures, t h a t  is, the eight modes of mental being chara~t~erization, 
&c. 
Their functionings are pleasure and pain. Thus oharaeteristic (i.e., virtue) differs 
when ripening into fruit, from Vica (that which is non-characteristic), when that ripen8 
into fruit. Similarly, knowledge, desirelessness and power as also pleasure, &C., differ from 
contradictory characteristics of the-same classes. The ordinary manifestations, i.e., when 
their natures are not intensified, do not co~~tradict 
their intense manifestations, i.e., 
when they are in the height of their manifestation. 
They, therefore, do manifest along 
I 
i with them. 
, 
Well, we understand thie. But how can the enjoyment of pleasurable objects be 
painful by nature ? For this reason he says :-' Thus do these, BC.' The m;?aning is that 
they arc both the same inasmuch as there is no difference in their material causes and 
the rnaterial cause and the effect thereof are the same in nature. 
What, is it then a case of absolute identity of nature ? If so, there would be no 
difference among mental concep5ions as they do exist. Bor this reason he says :-' It ia 
by the quality which is the leading factor, &C.' The presence of the qualities is in their 
ordinary nature. The leading factor is that which is intense. Bor this reason, all is 
but pain to the discriminating, by nature as well as on account of surrounding circum- 
stances. And pain has to be removed by the wise. And pain cannot be removed unless 
its root is removed. Barther, the root cannot be removed unless it is known. FOP this 
reason shows the root thereof :-' The seed out JP which grows, &C.' 
The meaning is that 
the seed is that out of which the heap of pains grows, i.e., from which it takes its birth. 
He mentions the means of its eradication :-L 
And of that the means of destruction, &C.' 
Now he explains that this science, which ie taught for the welfare of all, is similar 
to another science of the same class :-b 
Be the science of medicine, &C.' 
That science 

.'?. 
b 
120 
PATAN JALI'S YOGA. 
\ 
which has four branches of discussion, is said to -be a science of four departments. The 
question now arises that inasmuch arc pain was ere now described as the thing which 
h& to be removed and the universe in evolution is now described ss the tiling to be 
removed, is t,here, not an evideut contradiction in this ? For this reasou he says :--' The 
universe in evolution being full of pain, &C.' 
Now he describes the minor operation of Nescience, whereby the evolution of the 
universe is set. in :-' The conjunction of the Prakriti and tho Puruss, &C.' 
He describes the means of liberation :-' Right knowledge is the means, &C.' 
Some are of opinion that liberation consists in the destruction of the very being' 
of him who does away with pain. A s  they say :-' The salvatiou of the mind is like the 
extinguishment of a lamp.' Others say that liberation' ~onsists in the appearance of Pure 
knowledge by the destruction of the afflictions togethcr with their potencies. He SW's 
to them:-'Here 
the individuality.oP the remover is not to bc oonsidcred .the pain, &C.' 
He points out the defect in the theory of removal :-- ' In the case of avoidability, &C.' 
No wise man ever works for self-destruction. It is, however, seen that men who carry 
s body full of intense pain, do attempt to destroy themselves. True. But it is only a 
few who do 80. 
Further, if this were so, there would remain no object of existence for the Purnga, 
inasmuch as there are spirits in evolution who enjoy different kinds of pleasure as gods, 
&C., 
and they too reach the s bate of liberation. Hence, liberation is not to be cousidered 
to be the annihilation of the very being of him who removes the pain. 
Well, then, let us suppose that the mind in the state of liberation takes up another 
nature. Par this reason he says :v6 
In the case of it being supposed that another nature ia 
put on, the theory of there being another cause for it, &C.' 
It means that if it is something 
which comes into existence, it is an effect and is, therefore, impermanent. Being impermanent 
it cannot be considered liberation (Mokna). Moksa consists in immortality. 
The expres- 
sion of pure knowledge is not immortal. It is not possiblo that expression (santana) 
should exist as separate from the thing expressed, and as an independent existence. 
The things that are expresscd arc, of course, impermanent. For .this reason we should 
try to find out a theory which would make it possible that Moksa should be permanent. 
Is is only thus that it would be possible to make Mok,sa an object for the Purusa to 
achieve. For this reason he says :-' When both those positions, &C.' Henoa B%ok?a is 
only the establishment cd the self in its own nature. This slono is Right know led^. 
Thus is this science said to possess four Departments.-15. 
SGtra 16. 
g:-q.rmq*C 
h 
rr g e 11 
W, Heyam, the avoidable. g:-, 
Duhkham, pain. m, Anagatam, not-yet- 
come. 
16. Pain not-yet-come is the avoidable.-67. 
* 
I s:w-%%n%mk6 
q @d 
&t 
I 
3 -@mmwhftc 9 ?rc'glmta? 
~
a
T
~
~
I a @ m W  
g:@ 
~
~
W
t
a
 
f%jmm&*ari*q*md 
r m* 
m@ 
BiIT9i srftr-3 
11 p@ I1 
VYASA. 
The p i n  which has passed away has been spent up by experience. 
It cannot, therefore, fall within the sphere of the avoidable. And that 

ca. 11. 
ON THE PRACTICE 08' YOOB, 16, 17. 
121 
which is present, is being experienced at the time of it$ existence ; it can- 
not, therefore, be considered as the avoidable with wterence to the future 
moment of time. Hence that pain alone whicll 1185 not yet been experi- 
enced, troubles the Yogi who is sensitive as the eye-hall ; it boes not 
' trouble any other knower. Hence that alone is the avoidable pain. 
It is 
the cause of this avoidable pain only that is to be discussccl.--67. 
~ A ~ E A S P A T I ~  
GLOSS. 
By the use of the words not yet come,' the past and the present have been taken 
out of the pnrview. He shows the propriety thereof :-' The pain that has paeeed awa$, 
&C.' 
But why should pain which ir present, Le., in the process of being enffered, be not 
considered as falling within the sphere of the avoidable, seeing that it has not been spent 
up by suffering ? For this reason he says :-' And thdt which ia present, &o.' 
The rest is 
ea~y.-l6. 
E(fit~*a 17. 
m Drastfi, of the knower. m: Drieyayob, and of the knowable. d: 
Samyogab, con junction. P Heya, of the avoidable pain. Q: HetQb, the cause. 
17. The Conjunction of the knower and the know- 
able is the cause of the avoidable pain.-68. 
The knoivcr is the Purusa (the consciotis principle) who coguizea 
the reflection from the Will-to-know by con junction. 
The knowable con- 
&ts of all the characteristics present in the essence of the Will-to-know. 
This then, the ktwwable behaves like a magnet. It is useful only when 
placed here. On account of its capacity of knowability, it becomes the 
possession of the lord, the Purusa, who is of the nature of the power of 
knowing. It becomes the object of the act of enjoyment, inasmuch m 
l6 

a1 tl~oagh by nature independent, it becomes dependent upon another, 
existing as it does for fnlfilling the object of that other. It is different 
in nature from the power of knowing (co~~sciousness), 
but puts on that 
nature by taking it up from another. The eternal conjunctionof the 
power o'f knowing and the capacity of being known, brought about by the 
pnrpose of existence, is the cause of the avoidable pain. 
And so it has 
been said :-' The conjunction therewith is tlle cause ; by giving that up 
is secured the complete remedy of pain, inasmuch as that is found to 
he the cause of the rernou a1 of the real thing, the cause of pain. AS, for 
example, the. soles of the feet possess the capacity of being pierced, and 
the thorn possesses the power of piercing. The remedy consists in not 
putting the foot on the thorn, or putting it with a shoe on. 
Whoever in 
the world knows these three things, secures the remedy and does not 
suffer the pain caused by tile prick. 
By what means? By the power 
of the three-fold knowfLdge. 
And here, too, it is the quality of the disturbing motion (rajas) that 
brings about the pain ; and it is the quality oE the Essence (sattva) which 
is pained. Why ? Because the act oE pain must live in an object, and 
it can,tlherefore,liveintheObjectivc Essencealone. It cannot live inthe 
unchanging actionless knower of 
the field. 
Because co~lsciousness 
(Puruga) has the Objective Essence for its field it follows along the h e s  
of the pheno~nena of the Essence, and when the Objective Essence is 
pained, the l'urusa also is pained by reflex action.--68. 
V~~CHASPATI~S 
GLOSS. 
The avoidable pain has been described. Its cause is now discussed. ' The conjunc- 
tion of the knower and the knowable is the cause of the avoidable pain.' 
NOW he describes the nature of the knower :-' The knower, &C.' 
The cognition by 
conjunction of the reflection from the Will-to-know (Buddhi) is the same as t h e  reflection 
of consciousness into the Will-to-know. This is present even in the Purusss who are 
indifferent (Udgsins). 
Well, but if this is all, it is the Will-to-know alone that can thus be visible to him, 
not sound, &C., which are not thus in contact with him (the Purasa). For this reason he 
says :-' The knowable consists of all the characteristics of the Will-to-be.' 
By means 
of the passage of the senses the Will-to-be tr:msforms as sound, &a. 
Sound, &C., thug 
becomes the characteristics of the knowable. 
This is the meaning. Well, but it is tl~o 
will-to-be that transforms as sound, &C., and thereby puts on these appearances. A s  to 
the Purusa however, the change takes place in him when his relation with the Will-to-be 
is perceived. If this relation is not recognized, how can sound, &C., be perceived even 
though they have entered the essence of the Will-to-be ? The knowable cannot be cog- 
nized without being in contact with the power OC consciousness. l?or this reason he 
says :--b't'bis then, the knowable behaves like, &C.' 
We have discussed in t h e  first 
chapter that the essence of the Will-to-be, being touched by consciousness, takes in the 
reflection of consciousness on account of its extreme purity, and being thus as it were 
transformed into consciousness cognizes sound, &C., in sequence. And it is for this reason, 

CR. 11. 
ON ?WE PRACTTCE OF YOGA, 17. 
, 
123 
that the seer enjoying sound, &C., presented to it by t h e  essence of the Will-to-be baving 
transformed into the sound, &C., becomes the master, and the essence of the Will-to-be 
statlcling to it in that relation becomes its p~ssession. This is the essence of the Will-to- 
be, which possessed of forms behaves as a magnet and becomes a possession of the Pi~m?a, 
who is the lord, as the power of 
consciousness. Why ? Because it becomes the 
object of the act of cognition in sequence. The cognition in sequence is the experi- 
ence of the Purusa. This means the action of the Purusa with the object in view. 
Bccoulillg the object thoreof means becoming enjoyablo. It is spoken of as his possession, 
bocaose it becomes enjoyable by him. 
S 
The question again arises that the essence of the Will-to-be being self-illuminated, 
how cat1 it be the object of cognition ? For this reason he says :-' It is different in nature 
from, &C.% The essence of the Will-to-be can be self-illuminating only, it i t  is reality of 
the nature of consciousness. Its nature, however, is different from that of consciousness, 
being as it is of the nature of the non-intslligent. It takes up the uature of co~lscious- 
ness by b o ~ r o ~ i n g  
it from the other. It is for this reason an object of cognition. 
The question now is that in&rnuch as anything is said to 'be dependent upon 
another when something constituting it rests in that other, the Will-to-be cannot be 
dependent upon the Puru?a, because nothing that belongs to the Will-t~-be rests upon 
the Purusa, who is by nature indifferent. It further follows from this that the Puriqa 
can have no action of his own. For this reason the author says : -' Although indepon- 
deut by nature, i b  becomes dependeut upon another, &c. The purpose of its existence 
being the fulfilment of the object of another, i.e., of the Purusa, i t  beco~ncs cleyendent 
upon that other, Le, the Purup. 
Well then this relation of the power of seeing and the capacity of being seen can 
either be innate or accidental. If it be innate, then both the related objects must 
always remain as such. The relation cannot cease to exist, because both of them arc 
il&&ri~ctible. 
The relation being thus impossible of cessation, there can never be an 
end of births and deaths. If it be incidental (naimittika), then because the afflictions, 
t h e  actions and their potencies are the modifications of the internal organ, they can 
exist only when the internal organ exists. And the internal organ is brought into 
existeuce by means of them. Thus each comes to depend for its existence upon the ex- 
istence of the other. Inasmuch as there cannot be this eternity of succession in the 
beginning of creation, the very setting in of evolution thus becomes impossible, and in 
facc non-existent. And so it has been said : -" Action is brought about by the 'qualities' 
even according to those who believe that the Purusa is not the actor. But how can that 
be brought about ? Karma does not exist then ? Nor is there untrue knowledge, nor 
attachment, nor aversion, &c. Nor is the mind born then, nor can any mental modifica- 
tions exist a t  all in t h e  case of any one." 
To remove this doubt the autnar says :-a 
The 
eternal conjunction of the power of knowing and the capacity of being known, brought 
about by the purpose of existence, &C.' 
True, the relntlion is not innate ; it is incidental. And although it is t h w  incidental, 
it has no beginning, because its existence has been caused by an eternal cause. dnd 
this succession of afflictions, actions and potencies is eternal. In each creation they 
become merged into the P r a k ~ i t i  together with the internal organ, and manifest agaill 
in the beginning of another creation in the same state in which. they were before. The 
illustration has been mentioned more than once before of how certain creatures of t he 
earth are reduced to earth on the cessation of the rains, but come back to life again whet1 
the rains return. 
Nescience is the cause of the co~~junction 
by antecedence. The fulfilment of the - 
object of the Puriya is the cause of keeping it on. It is by virtue of that that the conjunc- 
tion lasts. For this reason is it said to have been caused by the purpose of the pupu+ 

pp 
- 
"And so it has beeneaid" by Pafichadikhl :-Wonjunction with that' means the con- 
junction with the Will-to-be (buddhi). It is this conjunction which is the cause of pain. 
By the cessation of that is secured t h e  absolute remedy of- pain. It is implied that pain 
live% on as long as the e~njmct~io~: 
does not cease. The author repents a well known 
illwtration of the same :--' As the soles of the feet, &C.' 
Well let that be so. But when it is said that the conjmctioi: with the 'qoalities' 
is the cause of pain, it becomcs admitted that the ' qualities ' are the pain-give's. 
Further 
the action of the verb ' to pain ' does not ' terminate in the actor alone, like that of the 
verb ' Is ' and others of the same class. Tlrere mnst be another object in its case which 
is pained. The Pii.rusa cannot be the object i n  which this pain may reside, because the 
Purup behg imluntable it callnot possess the nature of beiug affected by the fruit of 
aptitra. Therefore, i t  being necessary for pain that there should be something pained. 
we infer its  on-existence wlleir no object of pain exists, just as me see that no smoke 
exists wllen them is no fire. For this reason the author says :-" And here too the 
quality of essentiality is paiued, &C."' 
It is the qualities which are either the pain-givers 
or the pained. Of these the Sattva being clelicate like the soles of the feet, is pained ; 
t h e  Rajas being slmp is the pain-giver. 
The author now puts a cloestion :-" Why is it the w r a  alone that is pained ? and 
not the Purop." 
The ansv-er is :-'l 
On nccoullt of the action of pain, &C." 
Weli, then, does not the Vuruga get, pain ? And further if it is only the aon-intel- 
ligent Sattva that is pained, what loss is thereby caused to us? For this reason he 
says:--'The 
~ a r i q ~  
is pained by reflex action.'-17. 
Sfitra 18. 
l 
lqvq 1 1 3 ~ 1 1  
svm Praklrin, of illuminatio~l. fi 
Ibiy6, of activity. fiofir Sthiti, inertia, 
&3 &lam, nature. 
Prakidakriyasthi t i h i n ,  Having the natu1.e 
of illumination, activity and inerti* 
Rhi~ta, the elements. 
pf;Zs Indrip., 
tile powers of sensation. m 
Atma~am, consisting of. 
~ l l o g a ,  experience. 
Jmcr;l Apavarga, emancipation. 
Artham, object. 
Driiya~n, knowable. 
18. The knowable is of the nature of illumination, 
activity and inertia ; it consists of the elements and the 
poljrers . of sensation, action and thought ; S  its objects are 
enlallcipation and experience.--69. 
~qqwv~;a'j~h 
I asnrfmrhPa* 
~ r n r d b '  
gripq I 
m-l 
~%P?T* TW~W&@ W & I 
2W: mW?lfR~r(- 
f$qmr: piimrfirir: ~mMrrr46rrn i&atrmw? trnf$adh: 
a 
V T ~ P V ~ T -  

CR. I I .  
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 18. 
125 
f&Tqym@qvftwn tR91 m ;rmmwd 
4 
s d a  & l  
I mm R
g
g
a
a
~
s
~
*
 
r3hOh 
0 
~ 8 ' d " d d e  
g h i t W ? m p h  I WlTa ~ W P T T X ~ W ~ ~ $
d- 
m: arm w*&t 
P i& 
mKcm i M 3  I 4;f mlal$? k!gsTa?r i+iW% 
g# 
m&&B W fh amzm iW% 
I wtq gm* QRu*~-M~~- 
ur9r m & I +;r 
~
g
~
*
&
t
~
a
w
~
~
i
%
~
 
q$t dim: 
W T ? I ~ ~ W 1 :  
B f$ FFG55W %TT%& 
Il 14 II 
VYASA. 
The nature of the knowal~le is now described :-' The knowable is 
of thenature of, &C.' 
The qualityof essentiality (Sattva)isof the nature 
of illumination. Energy (Rajas) is cf the nature of activity. Inertia is of 
the nature of inactivity. These 'qualities' are capable o'f being coloured 
more or less by proximity to one another. They are ever evolving. They 
have the characteristics of conjunction and separation. They manifest 
forms by each lending support to the others by proximity. None of 
these loses its distinct power into tbose of the others, even though each 
may exist as thtr principal factor of a phenomenon, with the others as 
subsidiary thereto. They take to the lines of different manife~tatiol~s 
of power in objects of the same or of different classes. 
When anyone 
of them is the priucipal factor of any phe~omenon, the others show their 
presence in close con tact. Their existence as subsidiary energies of the 
principal factor is inferred by their distinct and independent function- 
ing, even thougl~ it be as subsidiary qualities. 
Their powers come into 
~nauifeststion by virtue of the objects of 
the Puruga having to be 
f ulfillecl. They bring about the fulfilment by mere proximity, acting 
in the same way as loadstone. They follow along the line of the 
1 
manifestation of one of them independently of any disposing cause. They 
are called by the name of Prndhbna (primordial matter). This is styled 
the knowable. This it is that consists of the element4 and the power8 
of action, sensation and thought. It evolves as the elements, the subtle 
and the gross PrithvE, &c. Sirnilarlv 
L, does it evolve as the powers of sen- 
sation, action and thought, the subtle and gross auditory and other 
powers. 
And this ,evolution is iiot purposeless, beginning as it does 
with a set purpose before it. The object of the "knowable" is of coulge 
the fulfilment of the objects of the Yuruga, experience and emancipation. 
Of these, experience consists in obtaining the knowledge of the nrrttlre of 
I 
I 

the desirable and undesirable phenomena of the qualities ; which know- 
ledge, however, does not recognize them as only the lnodi fications of the 
qrialities. Emancipation is the ascertainment of the nature of the enjoyer, 
the Purnsa. Beyond the knowledge of these two there is no wisdoin. 
And so it has been said:-"And 
this one, hovever, having come to know 
the three 'qualities' to, ,be the actors and the fourth Pi~rusn to be the 
actionless knower of their action, and knowing also the outputs of the 
qualities, not' yet known, that are being presented to the Purusa, who is 
of the same and not yet of the same class with them, no loqger snspects 
the existence of any other wisdom. 
S S 
1 
Well, but how can either experience or emancipation, which being 
both of them the works of the Will-to-be live in the Will-to be alone, be 
predicated of the Purusa? 
As victory and defeat existing in the soldiers 
are predicated of their master, because it is he who enjoys the Iruit 
thereof, 80 are bondage and freedom existing in the Will-to-be alone 
predicated oE the Puruy,, ljscanse he is the enjoyer of their fruit. It is 
of the Will-to-be alone that the bondage exists until the object oE the 
I 
Purrl~a is fulfilled ; and it is the fulfilment of the object that is emanci- 
pat8ion (MokSs). Similarly have perception, retention, judgmen tl, rejechn 
knowledge of realities and the distinction of unrealities their existence 
fastened on to the Purusa although they have their existence in the Will- 
to-be, liecause he is the enjoyer oE their fruit.-69. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
The presentation of objectivity is the cause of pain, and that has been described 
be€oro. The author now-describes the knowable :--' The knowable is of the nature of 
illnmination, &C.' 
It is a quantum of essence (Snttva) as 1urninosit)y that is coloured by 
a quantum of inertia (t&nms) as weakness and by a quantum of disturbing ellergy 
(Rajas) as pain. Similarly may this be illilstrated in t h e  case of existences in which Rajas, 
&C., prevail. It is this that is intended to be said by, 
' These qualities are capable of being coloured more or less by proximity to one 
another .' 
ri 
Z I 
They have the characteristics of conjunction and separation 'with and from the 
Yorup.' .As i t  is said in the Veda :--' One unborn is there who is red, white and black ; 
4 
she goes on giving birth to many similar children. One unborn Purusn follows her m- 
I 
joyiog ; another unborn (Puru~a) 
gives her up, having enjoyed all her enjoyab1es.-(Sveta- 
dvatara Tip.) 
It is said of tahcm that they manifest forms, by lending support to oue another, inas- 
much as it is thus that the pyifltvi: and other tattuas are evolved. Grant that. But inas- 
much RS Disturbing Energy (rsjas) and Inertia (tiimas) snbserve the quality of Essenti- 
ality (sattva), when the latter bri!iys abonb the production of the qt~iescent notion (S~nta 
pratyava), 
a- 
they too are the causcs of the production and mnst 3s such possess the virtues 
(that bring about the production). 8nch being the case, t h e  same quiescent notion 
must be manifest'even when the rajas and the tlrnas arc the principal factors as iq mani- 
fested i ~ i  
%he case of tbo equality of Essentiality being the principal factor, and not the 

CR. II. 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 18. 
127 
di~turbed and forgetful notions. For this waeon the author eryea:-' None of these lose% 
its distinct power into those of the others, even though each may exist as the principal 
factor of a phenomenon, with others as subservient thereto.' 
It may be that R$@ and 
tbrnae exist as subservient factors when the quiescent notion has to be manifested, but 
their energies are not merged into that of the other. The fact that the energies are not 
merged is to bc inferred from tho fact of the effects thereof not disappearing into ehch 
uther. Inasmuch as the quiescent, disturbed and forgetfol effects are fouud along with 
the intensifled manifestation of the several ' qualities', not being merged into the others, 
i t  is proved that t h e  separate qualities of their energies are not destroyed by conjunction. 
Let that be granted. But if these energies are eepawte from one another and con- 
not be merged into t h e  others, that it cannot bo mid of the 'qualities' that tbey can 
come together with t h e  object of bringing about a single effect. Different energies are 
never found coming together to bring about o sinkle effect. It never happens that 
thread, earth and straw should come together to produce a jar and such other things. To 
this he sags in answer : -' They take to the linee of different manifestations of power 
in objects of the same and of different classes.' 
Although the power of forming the mate- 
rial cause exists with reference to objects of the seme clase only and not with reepect 
to others, the power of helping t h e  cause to manifest as rr particular effect does certainly 
exist in objects of diferent claases ~Iso. A s  to a cloth, straw doea not possees the power 
of even helping the material cause in the manifestation thereof. It, therefom, cannot 
come together with thread to bring about a cloth. They are spoken of as taking to the 
lines oi different energies in objects of the same and different classes, becanee it is their 
nature to do so. 
' A t  the time of their being the principal factors':-When 
a divine body has to be 
generated, the quality of essentiality becomes the principal factor, and the qualities of 
disturbing energy (rajas) and inertia (tllrnas) are subservient. It is for tbis reason tbat 
these qualities show their antecedent closenens at t h e  time of their not being the princi- 
pal factors, i. e., 
their modifications tend towards t h e  imlnediate manifestation of the 
& 
intended effects. 
The words 'principal factore' are intended chiefly to signify the stab of being. As 
in the aphorism of lB&nini, 'The dual nnd the singular in caae of two and one,' the mean- 
ing is that in case of duality and unity, the dual and siegular are to be used ; for were it 
not so, the words used would be 'twos' and ' One8 ' (in the plural n aber). 
. 
Well, b u t  the question arises, that in the case of their being the principal factors of 
any phenomenon i t  is possible to posit their existence becanee $hey are then in manifesta- 
tion ; not so however when they are not in manifestation. What rea8on is then there to 
Bappose that they do exist, when they are not in manifestation? For thie reasonChe 
eaye :-' Their existence as sabservient energies, &a.' 
Even though they are not in mani- 
festation, yet their existence as subetanoes subeerving the prinoipal 'factor by helping 
it to bring about a particular effect is inferred by their funotioning alone, inasmuch ae 
they do not possess the power of diecriminating intelligently, the one from the other, and 
have the capacity of causing effect by coming together. They are, therefore, thus 
dexrcri bed. 
Well but granting that the qualities have the power of bringing about the manifwta- 
tion of edtecta ,by coming together, how ie it that they do bring about the effects. It ilr 
not neceseary that whoever has the power mnet use' it also. To ehow that thie power 
does not stop in its action of causing the manifef3tstion of effecb, he says :-' Their powen 
come into manife&ation by virtue, b.' The meaning is that the 'qualities' teem to act 
only when all the objects of the P a r u p  have been fulfilled, It is only then that they do 
not prodace eff ecte. 

P ~ ~ T A N J A L I ' S  
YOGA. 
The qnostion arises that inasmuch a9 the qualities do not confer any benefit q m n  
t h e  Puru?a, how can it be said that the fuldlmont of the objects of the Purusa sets them 
into aetiod. Bor this reason he says:-'They 
bring about the falfilrnent by mere 
proximity.' 
But the question arises that virtue and vice being the evident disposing causes of 
tllc action of the 'qualities' why is it said that their powers come into manifestation by 
virtue of the objects of the Puro?a having to be fulfilled ? In answer to thb he says :- 
' They follow in the line of tlhc manifestation of one of them, &C.' 
Whichever of the 
three, whether thesattva, the Rajas or the T&,nas functiolls as the principal faotor 
to manifest its effect, the others follow along its line without the existence of a disposing 
cause in the shape of virtue and vice, The same will be said :-- 
"No disposing 3ause sets the Prakritis in motion ; it removes the obstacles only, 
like the husbandman."-3.28. 
" These qualities " are called by the name of pmdh%na--this is the construction. 
They arc called by the name of Pradl~iinit, derived as the word is from the root 4 
DH A, ' to 
maintain,' meaning those by which the whole world is maintained. This is called 'the 
knowable.' 
Having thus described the nature of t h e  qualities, now the author describes their 
effects :-' This it is that consists, &a.' 
When it is proved that the effects exist in reality, 
it is apparent lhat everything evolves according to its own nature. Now he explains 
how it is of the nature of the elements and the powers of sensation, &c. ' It evolves as 
the elements, &C.' Now he introduces the portion of the aphorism. Its objects are ex- 
perience and emancipation. And this evolution is not purposeless, inasmuch as it sets 
in with a fixed purpose before it. 
The author explains experience (bhoga):--4 Of theso, experience, &C.' 
Pleasure and 
pain are the phenomena of the Will-to-be which is of the nature of the three qualities. 
It is the Will-to-be that modifies ss these. Experience, however, does not consist in deter- 
mining their nature as qualities. For this reason he says :--' Which knowledge, however, 
does not recognize them as only modifications of the qhalities.' 
This has often been 
discussed. 
The author explains emancipation. 
The ascertainment of the nature of the enjoyer.' 
The radical moaning is that by which it is separated from somobhing (Apa vgij, varga). 
Now he explains the non-existence of any other purpose :-' Beyond the knowledge 
of these tmo there is no other wisdom. 
And so it has been said by PaiichaiikM :-'And 
this one however, &a.' 
\ 
The queatiou now arises that experience and emancipstiou being both the modifies- 
tiow of the Will-to-be and as such having their being in the Will-to-be, how is it that they 
are predicated Q( the Puru+a, who is not their cause and in whom they do not live ? For 
this reasons he say8 :-" Well but ho.w can either, &C." 
It has beon said that the P u r q a  
is the enjoyer, and the subject will be discussed further besides. In reality, however, 
it is by the Will-to-be alone that tbe object of the Puruea is fulfilled. It is by this des- 
cription of the nature of the relationship of t h e  Purusa to experience and emancipation, 
that the nature of the relationship of the Purnga to perception, &C., should also be known. 
But of these perception is the knowledge of an object such ss it ia The mewdry there- 
of is retention. Judgment consists in discovering t h e  particular differential of tho 
precepts. Rejection meals the removal by reasoning of the untrue fact8 that haye entered 
the mind. 
The knowledge of realities consists in owning to a conclusion by judgment 
and rejection. The knowledge of the 4 h i n g ~  to be rejected and accepted, preceded by the 
knowledge of the realities. is the distinguishing of the unrealities.48. 

CH. II. 
ON *TTRE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 19. 
129 
Vide*, 
specialised. d%M ~ v i d e p ,  unspecialiaed. m Liliga-m$tia, 
un differentiated phenomenal. 
Aling&ni, and the noumenal. 3. Gnpa, 
of the qualities. vPfi Parvagi, stages. 
1 
19. The Specialised, the Unspecialized the Undif- 
ierantiated phenomenal and the noumenal are the stages 
This is composed for the purpose of ascertaining the difference8 of 
nature shown by ' the qualities ' which constitute the ' knowable.' The 
Specialized, the Unspecialized, the Undifferentiated Phenomenal and the 
Noumenal are the stages of ' the qualities.' 
Here the elernente known as Ak64a (ether), Vhyu (Invisible gag), 
Tejee (Steam or visible gas), Apae (liquid) and Prithvt (solid) are the 
17 

. 
l 
130 
PATAA7JALI'S YOGA. 
- 
9 
specialized modifications of the unspecialized soniferous, tangiferoua, 
lumniferous, gustiferous and odoriferous measures thereof (the tanmhtrs, 
the subtle elements). 
Similarly are the powers of sensation (hearing, touch, sight, taste 
and smell), the powers of action (speech, grasp, position, execution and 
generation), the eleventh Manas, which has all these as its sphere, the- 
specialized modification of the unspecialized modification of the principle 
of egoism. Thus sixteen-fold is the specialized modifications of the 'quali- 
ties. 
six are the unspecialized  modification^ and these are sonifemus, 
the tangiferous, the lumniferous, the gustiferous and the odoriferous 
' ultimates ' the tmm8 tras. Tliese five unspecial ized modifications, the 
soniferous and the others, possess respectively one, t m, three, fow and 
five of the qualities of souncl, &c. The sixth unspecialized m6dif~atlon 
is the Pure Egoism. 
These six are the unspecialized modifications of Pure Be-negs, the 
Great Principle, the MahA km&. This G reat Reality is tile Undiflewn- 
tiated Phe~lornenal Stage beyond the Unspecialized. In the Great Principle 
of Pure Be-ness c10 these live and grow up to their bigheet capacity. On 
Znvolution they pass back in to t
h
~
 
state of Pure Be-nese, the great princi- 
ple; and thence they pass into the state which neither IS, nor yet IS 
NOT, that in which it exists and yet does not; that which is Real, the 
Unmanifested, the mumenon, the background of all. This is their 
undifferentiated phenomenal modification 5 and that which neither IS nor 
yet IS NOT, is the nounlend modification. The objects of the Puruea 
are no cause of the nournend state. That is to say, the fulfilment of the 
objects of the Purusa does not act as the cause of manikstation with 
I 
referel~ce to the nournenal state, in the beginning. The f ulfilment~of the 
objects 
the Puru~a is not, therefore, the reason of the existence of the 
cause, 
fir the reason that it ie not brought in to existence by the Puruga'a'~ 
objects it is said to be eternal. AS to the three specialized etatea, the 
fulfillnent of the objects of the Purusa becomes the cause of their mani- 
featation in the beginning. And because the objects of the Puruss 
become tile cause of tk&r manifestation, they are said to be non-eternal. 
qualities,' however follow, up all these characteristics. They are, 
therefore, -neidler barn nor disappear at each stage. They only appear as 
it were possessed of the characteristics of birth and death, because &heir 
individual phenomena in which they of course are present, are pomessed 
of the characteristics of dissolution and birth with reference to their p
~
t
L 
and present, &c. As (when we say) " Devadatta has become poor," 
Why ? 
Because all hi8 cattle are dead. The dcath of his cattle has caused hie 
, 

CH. IL 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, l9 
131 
poverty and not the destruction of his own ~ubstance. This ie an analo- 
gous conception. 
The Undifferentiated pllenomenal (Lihga) is the next after the Nou- 
menal (aihga). It exists tilorein as the same substance, and is distin- 
guished from that, because the law of the order of appearance is invisible. 
Similarly, the six unspecislised modi fieations . have their being 
in the undiff eren tiated phenomenal and are distinguishdd from that hy the 
order of evolution being inviolable. 
Similarly are the elements and the power of sensation having their 
bei r g . in these unspecialized modifications, distinguished from them. 
And it has been said before that there is no other tattva appearing in suc- 
cession after the specialized modifications. Their modifications consist of 
the characteristic (d harma) the secondary quality (lakdana) and condition 
(avasthg widen t), They will be described.-70. 
It is for sesertaining the different modification+ of the 'qnaliti- ' that go to make 
up the knowable that this is composed :- 
U The specialized, tho unspecilized, the uadifferentiated phenomenal and the nou- 
menal are the etages of qualities." 
" The. specialized : "-The 
unspecialized modifications are those that aw free from 
the specialities whioh may be described as the qniscent, the disturbed and the forgetful. 
%'he specialized modifications are their outcomes only. They do not evolve further 
taevss* 
He deactibee them : -" 
Here the elemouts found, &C." 
$hey are enumerated here 
in the order of their manifeatation. 
The power8 of sensation md thought are the specialized modifications of the anspa- 
cialized principle of egoism, with the quality of essentiality (sattva) as the principal 
f d ~ r .  The powem of action are the modifications of the Rfijasic form of that principle. 
The M
~
M
 
ia of the nature of both and should be considered as possessing both of these 
the principal factors. Hem the five tanmiitraa are the effects of the Willh-be (bud- 
dhi), because they are the unspecialized modittcationa, just like the principle of egoism. 
Non-specialization consists in being the cause of further modificatione. 
Having ennmemtad the tanm9tras and the principle of egoism a~ the nnspeciali~ed 
modillcatione, now he enumerate the speciali~ed :-' This is the sixteenfold, &c! 
Then he 
enumenrtee the upepecialized :-"Six, 
etc." Next he illustrates by putting them to- 
gether :--" 
And these are, &C." The latur is in each osse qqalified by the former. The 
'smell vibration' has by natuk five secondary qualities. The taste vibration has by 
nature four ; the lumnilerous three, the tangifems two, and the souiferous has bat 0x18 
eecondary quality, namely, the sound. 
Well of whet are these eix rnodiflcationa or effects ? He sage :--' They are the modi- 
!hations of PURE BB-NESS.' That which is capable of fulfllling the objects of the 
Puruga 18. Its state is eignided by BE-NESS. Pure means limited by that alone. Thb 
b the Great Principle, the Mahattsttva. The meaning ie that whatever of work is there 
tor fulfllling the objects of the Puruy, whether it appears in the shape of the enjogablw 
of sound, &a., or in the &ape of the discrimination of the distinction between the P
u
~
 
and h t t v a  (conscio~llmeerr and the Eewenoe d Objective matter). a11 has ita end in the 

132 
PA ?'AA~JAL~'S 
YOGA. 
shape of the discrimination of the distinction hetwecn the P u r u p  and Sattva (con~cicusnes~ 
and the Essence of Objective matter), all has its end in t h e  Great Principle of the Will-to- 
be. This is described as t h e  ~ t r n ~ ,  
with the object of denying its smallness bx showing 
that it constitutes the very nature, t h e  very being of all modifloatio~~s. This is the first 
+ 
modification of the Vrakyiti. I t  is a real mpdification, not a mere unfoldment therof. 
"Beyond the undifferentiated means divided off from it in time with reference to 
the other objects which are nearer to it in time, i.e., the uospecialized. This is the Malta- 
tattva, the Great Principle of the undifferentiated Phenomenal. In thir *Great Principle 
of Pure Be-ness lives the determining energy of all further phenomenal modifications, 
that is the unspeoialized phenomena, because it is proved that they possess t h e  capacity 
of effecting the fulfilment of the objects of the Purusa, possessed as they are of real 
existence. There they grow to their highest capacity of growth, i.e., reach that state. 
As to the modifications in succession of t h e  specialized modificatioi~s of the unspecixlized 
ones, these further modifications are characteristic secondary quality and condition. 
This is the end of their growth, i.e., of their further modification&. 
Ha~ring thus described the order of evolution, npw he describes tho order of involution. 
Involution means passing into latency into the antecedent modification, the determining 
cause of its existence, its A t m i  (self). 'I'he Unspecialized modifications into which the 
8pecialized ones have already become latent, pass back in their turn into the Pure Be-nes~, 
the Great Mahatattva. Thcnce the Unspeuializcd modifications along with their Mahat 
modification pass back into the Unmsnifcsted. It is called Aliriga, the Noumenal, because 
beyond this do the phenomena pass into latency. This is the final state of latency of the 
phenomenal world. " That which neither IS nor yet IS NOT" is a description of this etate'. 
Its existence consists in its possessing the capacity of effecting the fulfilment of the 
objects of the Purusa. Non-existence means want of capacity to be taken into account, 
to force itself upon attention. It is so described, as9 being beyond both these states of 
existence and non-existence. This is the meaning. The state of the equipoise of the 
three qualities of Essence, inertia, and Energy is nowhere of use in fulfilling the objects of 
the Pump. It, therefore, does not exist as such. On the other hand, it does not admit of 
being rejected as non-existent, like the lotus of the sky. It is, therefore, not non-existent. 
Grant that. But the principles of Mahat, &C., exist as such in the state of the 
unmanifested also, because nothing that exists can. be destroyed ; sod if it is destroyed iB 
cannot be born again, because nothing that does not exist can be born. It foUows, thero- 
fore, that the principles of Mahat, &C., existing in the state of the unmanifested, that state 
also can effect the fulfilment of the objects of the Parusa. How then can it be aaid 
that the unmanifested is not possessed of existence ? For this mason he says :-' Thad 
in which it exists and yet does not exirst.' 
This means that the cause exists in that state 
but not the effect as such. Although the e'floct exists in the cause in posse, yet it is 
incapable of performing its function of falfilling the object of the Puruqa. It is, therefore, 
rsaid to be non-existent as such. 
Further he says that thirs cause is not of the nature of a hare's horn :--l6 
That which 
is real (not asat, non-existent)." It is beyond the state of non-existence, that is, of the 
existence of the effect only as such. If it were like that, then it would be .like the lotus 
of the sky and no effect would follow from that. 
Having described what takes place in the case of every manifestation, now he 
summarizes :vb 
This is their undifferentiated, BC.' ' This ' refers to what hae gone im- 
mediately t efore. The sbates of existepco from the undifferentia ted Phenomenal do- 
wards are impermanent, because they have been brought into manifestation by virtue 
of the objecb of the Pump having to be fulfilled. The noumenon, bowever, is permane&, 
becotwe it has not been brought into being by the objects of the Puruga The author 
dwribea the cat638 :-' The objects of the Pmga are no cauee, Bo.' 
,- 

CH. 11. 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 10, 20. 
133 
How is it, however, that the objects of the Purutp are no cause ? Be says :--g 
That 
ig W say, h.' By usinq the words, a does not act as the cause,' he indicates, the know- 
ledge of the nature of the p r h c i ~ l e  under discussion. This is the meaning. The fulfil- 
ment of the objects of the Purusa may be understood to be the cause with reference to 
the noumenal state, if that etate bring about the enjoyment of sound, Sic., or manifest 
the disorimination .t the distinction between aonsciousness and Objective Existence. 
If, however, it did t ,.t there would be no equipoise. 
For this reason t h e  objecta of the 
Purup are not uudc;:stood to be the cause of the noumenal state. Hence the fulfilment 
of the objects of the Purusa is not the cause of the noomenal state. This he sum- 
mwizes :--' Por the reaeon that it is not brought into existence, &c! 
The word IT1 in 
the text means, 'for the reason that.' 
He describes non-eternity :-"As the three 
states, i.e., the undiilerentiated phenomenal, Vie anspecialized and the specialized." 
Having described the nature of the stages, now he describes the nature of the ' quali- 
ties,' :-' The qualities, however, &c! Then he gives an illustration :-' As for example, 
Devadatta becomes poor.' 
The meaning is thrt when the entirely different. phenomena of the rise, increase 
and decrease of his bovine wealth cause the rise and fall of Ilevadattzr to be inferred, 
what need then be said of the appearance alld disappearance of individual phenomena 
which although different from the 
qualified " themselves, are yet of their very nature 
and not altogether different from them. 
. - 
The question now is whether the order of manifestation is alterable. The answer 
is, It is not. ' ' Tho undifferentiated phenomenal is tho next after, &C.' 
The seeds 
of Nyagrodha are not certainly capable of putting forth at once the full-grown, thickly- 
set tree of Nyagrodha capable of protecting from the fierce heat of the sun with, the 
thick setting of its leaves, twigs, branches and body. The tree comes out only gradually 
in the ordered appearance of shoots, leaves, body and branches, brought about by 
contact with earth, water and heat. Here too must, therefore, be established an order 
of appearance proved to exist both by reason and authority. 
How have the elements and the powers of sensation and action their origin in- the 
unspecialised modifications? It has been said before in the Comn~entary to this very 
aphorism. 
Now ho says why the further modification of the specialized3 modifications into 
other principles has not beeu spoken of. ' There isno other appearance in snccession 
after, &C.' 
Are the specialized modifications then quite unchangeable ? If so, they must 
be permanent. H'or this reason hasays :--' Their modifications consist of the charac- 
teristic, &C.'-10. 
SOTRA 20. 
3;et Drasd, 
.. the seer. @h~: 
Dridi-mhtrab, consciousness only. S: Suddhab, 
pure. 6 
Api, even though. 
Pratyaya, by imitation. : 
~ n u ~ a d ~ a b ,  
cognizing ideas. 
- 
20. The seer is consciousness only ; even though 
pure, he cognizes ideas by imitation.--71. 
mmFi gmv4 vs: FwmrmT- 
I if= zlbm: g- 
** m9m: I g h m  * 
&$PmwQ$& I Fr * 
*mew*a-m*rmv* 
I 9 xFmwv 
I ViPIrq I 
dmWit@ *mm=r 
h % r  md$krRpm mm- 

134 
PATA NJALZ'S YOGA. 
VYBSA. 
The knowable has been described. Discussion is now begun with 
the object of describing and ascertaining the nature of the seer (knower). 
' The seer is consciousness only : even though pure, he cognizes ideas by 
imitation.' 
' Consciousness only' : This rneans that he is nothing other than 
the power of becoming conscious ; that is to say, he is not touched by the 
qualities. This Puruga cognizes the Will-to-be by reflex action.' He- i~ 
neither quite similar nor quite dissimilar to the Will-to-be (buddhi). 
' €re is not quite similar.' 
Why ? The Will-to-be having for its sphere 
of action objects knonn, and not yet known, is of coarse changeful. 
The changefulness is shown by its objects, such as the cow and the 
jar, &C., being both known and unknown. The fact, however, that t+he 
splme of consciousness is alwaya the Known, renders it plain that con- 
sciouaness is not changeful. How ? i t  never happens that the Will-to- 
know becomes the sphere of conscioueness both when it takes in sorue 
liotion and when it does not. Hence it is proved that the Known i e  
always the sphere of the Puruga. Thence the unchangeability of the 
l ? ?  
Puroga ie shown. Further the Will-to-be exists to mfil another'e object, 
bringing as it does more than one phenomenon together into itself, for 
the purpose of presenting them to the Purusa. The Puruga, however, 
has his own object before it. 
Besides the Will-to-be ie the underlying determinative energy of 
all objective phenomena, and is as such of the nature of the qualitiee. 
It is, thereEore, non-intelligent. 
The Puruga, however, is the seer of the 
qualities by pwrimity. 
S%z these reasons he is not similar. 
Well then let him be dissimilar. To meet this he says :-'He 
is 
not quite dissimilar.' 
Why ? ' Even though pure, he sees the ideas 
after they have come into the mind.' 
Inasmuch as the Puruga cognizes 
the ideas as the Will-to-be eeized of consciousness is transformed into 

l 
l 
CB. 11. 
O N  THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 20. 
135 
I 
them, he appears by the act of cognition to be as it were the very self 
of the Will-to-be, although in reality he is not so. 
As it has been 
said :-' The power oE the enjoyer is certainly unchangeable, and it does 
not run after every object. 
I n  connection with a changeful object 
it look8 as it mere being transferred to every object, and imitates its 
modifications.' 
And when that modification of the Will-to-be assumes the form 
of conscioumess by which it is coloured, it imitates it and looks as 
if it mere n mawifestation of consciousness unqualified bv 
a# the modifics- 
tione.of the Will-to-be. It is accordingly so spoken of.-71. 
I 
Tha knowable hss been described; the discussion for the ascertainment of the 
' 
nature of the seer ie now began :-'The seer is conaciowness &me ; even though pure, 
he cognizes ideas by imitation.' 
~e bxplains it :Lb 
Consciousne~u alone, not' tooohed by 
m&ifying characteriatica.' 
By this the object of using the word only or alone is shown. 
4- 
Well, if i t  be so, if the power of the aeer be iree from all the attribute8 of sound, &a., 
they would not be known. Nothing that ie not touched by the act of eeeing, can be 
knowable. For this reason he says :--' That Purues, &C.' 
The paseisg of the refleatlan 
of the Purnja into the mirror of the Will-to-be ie the knowing o? the Will-t6be by the 
Purnga by reflex acti-on. it is thus that sound and touch, &C., 
are known by the Will-to- 
be which has received into itself the reflection of the Purosa. And it is thua that they 
become the knowable. 
Well, if this be eo, why should not coneciousdess and the Will-to-be be coneidered 
to be really one in nature? What is the uee of this reflection of the Purnqa into 
the Will-to-be? For this reason h e  says :-' Be is not -similar to the Will-to-be.' 
In- 
asmuch as in t h e  cpee of, dissimilarity it would be diflcult to accouut for reflection, 
it'is further said :---g 
Nor is he quite dissimilar.' 
Of these he denim similsrity :-g 
He 
ia not q u i b  similar, &C.' 
Then he asks tho question :--' Why 1' He gives the anBwer 
with gromds : -' The Will-to-h having for the ephere of its aotion, &C.' Inasmuch M 
( t h e  Will-to-be is changeful it is dissimilar. When it assumes the shapes of sound, (to., 
then its sphere becomes instinct with sound, &C.,. and thns hecomes known. '1f it hae not 
taken up the forms of sound, &C., then they remain unknown. Hence the Will-to-be whioh 
t a k a  up t h e  forms of sounds, &C., only sometimoa is changeful. And the efatement is eo 
made :-' The Will-to-be is changeful bccause it is the sphere ol both the known and bhe 
I 
yet onhnomn, like the sense of hearing, &C.' 
F 
A s  tb the dissimilarity of the Puruga with the will-to-be, it is proved by the op- 
posit& reasoning 
The fact, however, Ghat the sphere of consciousaem is alway8 the 
known, &c,' 
Wall, but if the known is always the ephere of the Pumqa, then he can never be 
abeolutely free (kevail.) With this in view he puts the question :--4 
fiow ? ' The anewer 
ie :-' It never happens that the Will-to-be becomes, &C.' 
9 
Ino~much as it is possible that in the state of the reetraint o? mental facultioq 
the Will-to-be and the absenoe cf actual cognitio~ might co-exist it is said with the 
objeot of indicating contrariety :-' because the sphere of conecioueneaa both when, &C.' 
The flmt copulative signifies that the Will-to-be must be the sphere and the ot6er 
rhowr the contrary atate. The statement of the reasoning will stand thus :--The Puruy 

never changes, because he is the constant factor in the phenomena of knowledge, in the 
outgoihg mental state and the state of the Cognitive trance. That which. is changeful 
cannot bo the constant faotor in the phenomena of knowledge, as the power of hearing, 
&c. 
This inference is by the canon of differen~e. 
He mentions another comrary characteristic also :-6 
The Will-to-bo fulfilling as it 
does the objects of the Purura by means of the residua of the afflictions and actions and 
the objects and powers of sensation, &C., 
coming together into it, exists for the purpos 
of mother: 
The statement of the reasoning is thus :-The Will-to-be exists for the 
purpose of anoth-, 
because its work is fulfilled by bringing together into itself various 
objects such as beds, seats and toilet powders, &c. 
\ 
He says that the P u r n p  is not like that :--' The Purusa, however, has its own 
ob ject before it.' All is made for the P n r w  The Purusr is not designed Eor any other. 
This is the meaning. 
He states another contrary characteristic :--b 
Because the Will-to-be is the underly- 
ing characteristic, &C.' The Will-to-be determines the nature of alb objects, a8 it is being 
transformed into their respective forms. Rurther, all these are t h e  modifkati~ns of the 
three qualities of Essence, Energy and Inertia. For this reason the Will-to-be is proved 
to possess the three qualities by nature. He says that the Purugia is not such.' ' The 
Parup, however, is the seer, &C.' The meaning is that he sees by reflection into it, not by 
being transformed into t h e  forms of the objects (like the Will-to-be). He snrnmarizes :- 
' For these reasons, &C.' The result of the reasoning being that he must be dissimilar, it 
is added that he is not altogethhr dissimilar. Why ? Because (heaving been reflected 
into the mind) he sees the ideas by imitating the modificgtions of the Wi!l-to-be. 
The 
may in. which this happens, has been described in the aphorism : " Identification with 
modifications elsewhere,"-I. 
4. 
So also has it been said by Ptrfichaiiikha :-a 
The power of the knower is certainly 
. 
unchangeable. The power of the knower meam the self ( B t m ~ . )  And althongh for this 
very reason it does not in reality change with the modifications of the Will-to-be, it as i t  
wore f'ollows the modifications of the Will-to-be, resting as it does in each object that 
comes into tho changeful mind. 
The question arises, How is it that it looks as it were running alter every object, 
although it, as a matter of fact, does not do so. Rurther how does it follow the modi- 
ficatiolls of the mind, 'when it does not modify itself ? For this reason he says :-b 
Ina* 
much as the Purusa cognizes, BC.' 
Seized ~f consciousness " :-This 
means having been coloured by contiguity. What- 
ever form the Will-to-be is transformed into, is as such coloured by ~onsciousness. The 
Will-to-be is said to be ' seized of consciousness ' when each transformation of it is as 
such coloured by consciousness. 
This is the meanicg. Although t h e  moon is not as 
8 matter of fact trausferred into pure water, yet inasmuch as its reflection pssses into 
water, it is as it were transferred into it. 80 also, the power of consciousness, althol~gh 
not ac&ally transferred into the Buddbi, yet i c  is, as it mere, transferred into it, because 
it is reflected ioto it. By that fact c~nsciousness becomes, as it were, of the very nature 
of the Will-to be. It accordingly follows the modifications of the Will-to-be. 
This ex- 
plains the words ' by imitation.' 
It is said it coenises 
d 
by imitation as it cognize8 by 
following the modifications of the Will-to-be.-20. 
q Tad, his. 
d: hrthab, purpose. M: Tadarthab, for his purpose. 
gvm Drid Tasya, of the knowable. 
being, existence. 

- 
-- 
CH. J I .  
P, 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOQA, 21. 
137 
I 
21. For his purpose only is the being of the "know- 
able.'-72. 
fBmf& It 3% II 
V Y ~ A .  
The knowable comes out as the object of the Pul-ga appearing 
an act of conseiousneas. 
For his purpose only, therefore, is the being 
of the knowable. The meaning is that it possesses the nature it doe% 
for that purpose. It8 nature, however, depending as it does upon another 
for its existence as such, is not cognized by the Purusa when the objecte 
of whieving the puposes of enjoyment and emancipation are over. This 
would seem to imply that it is destroyed, because what constitutes 
-* 
it0 
verybeing is thus done away with. But it is not destroyed.-72. 
~ACHABPATI~S ULOSIS. 
Having described the nature of the knower and the knowable, now he says that the 
knowable exists for the knower, showing 
- as this do= in part the relationship existing 
between the two, the relation, tbat is to say, of the lord to his posseesiona ' 
this 
purpose only is the being of the knowable: 
He explain8 it 
The knowable comes oat 
a8 the object of, Le., being enjoyable by the enjoyer, the Puru9a, appearing as an act 
of consciousnees.' 
For this reason the existence of the knowable is for his purpose only, 
i.e., for the plvposo of the knowor alone, and not for the purpose of the knowable- 
(The word translated here as the being is in the original Atm$, the self. Hence arises 
the question, How can the self exist fbr the self ?) 
For this reaeon he says :-POSS~SS~S 
the nature it does for that purpose. This is the meaning :-The 
knowable being of the 
S 
very nature of ,leasure and pain, is the enjoyable. Pleasure and pain which consist in 
being of the same class with the then prevailing mental dabit, are in reality put up 
as such for his purpose only. The objects also such as scund, &C., cause pleasure and 
pain only because they also are of the nature of the knowable. And it is not themselves 
that are to be pleased or pained, because in that case these modilcations wodd act M 
contrary to themselves. Ry the canon of residues, therefore, the 
of conscioue- 
ness only can be ol~posed or favoured Therefore the being of the knowable i8 for the 
purpose of the hrusa only an3 not for the purpose of the knowable itself. 
It is because the being of the knowable is for the purpose of the Puru?a and not 
for the purpose of the knowabk itself, that its hature acts to that purpose *until that 
parpose of the Pnrusa is achieved ; anti ceases to act when that purpose has been achieved. 
For this reaeon he says :-g 
Its nature, howayer, &G.' 
In iteelf the knowable is nnintelli- 
gent. It is ensouled by another, by conscionsness which is the natuw of the self. " In- 
sonled by consciousness" means that its nature as such is informed thereby. When 
enjoyment and emancipation have keen achieved, it is no longer seen by the Purqa. 
Enjoyment is the experience of sound, QC., as pleasure and pain, &c. Emancipation is 
the direct knowledge of the distinction between the Purnqa and Objective Existencm 
(lbttva). The Will4m-be is nnintelligeut and by itself does not knoy either. It is 
only by the reflection of the Purqa into itself that it does so. The enjoyment and 
18 

the dlrect knowledge of the distinct nature of the Puraga and Objeotive 101isbaoe,.belollg 
therefore to the Purqa Himself. Thus when the enjoyment and emmcipation of the 
Puruaa have been achieved, the purpose of the sxiatenoe of the knowable no longer re- 
maine. The enjoyment aud emanoipation have no longer to be achieved. Henoe it ha0 
been said:-'When 
the object of achieving enjoyment and emanoipation has been 
aahieved, &G.' 
In this connection he raises a doubt :-' It would idlow, &a.' and ref'utea it :-' But 
it is not destroyed.'-72. 
SGtra 22. 
, 
* 
U P? II 
Krh-artham, whose objects have been achieved. 
wf% Prati, to him. 
Nastain, 
. . 
destroyed. 
Api, although. 
Ana$am, not destroyed. 
Tad, from that. 
a*l Anya, to othere. 
S$dh&rapatv&t, being common, 
owing to commonness. 
22. Although destroyed in relntion to him whose 
objects have been achieved, it is not destroyed, being 
V Y h .  
Why is it not destroyed ? 
Although destroyed in relation to him 
whose objects have heen achieved, it ie not destroyed, being common to 
othera" than him. Even though destroyed, i.e., pasmd in to annihilation, 
in relation to one Puruaa, whose objects have been achieved, it ie not 
destroyed in reality, because it is common to other Purugae beaide him. 
Although it is destroyed to the Purusn who has attained wisdom, it is 
not destroyed in relation to the Puru~as who have not attained wisdom, 
C.8 it hw not done ite duty by them yet. It is, therefore, still related to 
them, as ae object of the act of coasciousness; and is as such of coiiree, 
ensouled by them inta form. 
Thie further explains the eternal conjunction of the indestructible 
energies of the knower and the knowable. 
As has been said :-The 
characterised being eternally conjoined, there is e t e r d  oatjunction of 
mere characteristics also. -73. 
~ A C ~ A ~ P A T I ' S  
moss. 
But becoming altogether unperceivable as it does, how is it that it is not destroyed ? 
Roreqbtalling this objectirn ha asks the question, ' W,hy ie it not destroved ?' and aaswur) 

oa. N. 
ON THE PRACPICE 08' YOUA, 2423. 
by the aphorism :-a 
Althoogh destroyed in relation to him who88 objecte have been 
whieved, &a' The Yaraqa whoee objects have been achieved, is so spoken of here. Even 
though destroyed in relation to bim, it, the knowable, is not really dwtroyed, becam 
it b oommon to all the -other hruyr, whether they be the wise ones or the undm 
on-. 
He e x p l a i ~  
:--b Even though destroyed, in relation, W.' Destruction means die- 
appeurmoe. The knowable, however, is not destroyed, being common to all the other 
Pucngm. Consoiouanesu i~ the n a t m  of the sell which is beyond the knowable. It i.8 
by that, that the knowable is emuled. That is known in the druti, Smriti, Pur&p 
and Itihha as the Unpmuifated, One without parts, not dependent upon anything else, 
pervading, eternal, po88essing the energy of all the effects in the world. It doee not 
bemme the objeclt of knowldge to the wiseman the act being contrary to hi8 nature. It is, 
however, Men by the unwise, .pd is not therefore pon-existent. Colour ie not seen by 
the blind man ; it does not, thorelore, cease to exist, being visible to a man with eye#. 
Biuther, there ia not one Purugo only like the Prakriti. That there are more Puraqaa 
thm ono ie 
by differences of life, death, pleasure and pain and evolution and 
emonoipation. & to the Vedio texts which bpeak of the ~ i t y  
of the Purngae, they ore 
oontnry to other authoritative knowledge ; they also can somehow be reconciled by the 
atwe noe of dilterenoe of time and place and by devotion. Further, the Vedio texb them- 
relves lay down clearly that the Praktiti is one and that the Purupts are many. Thtlrr 
the text :-"One 
unborn is there, who ie red, black and white; ehe goes one giving birth 
to many children. One mbosn Pnrup follows her enjoying; another ndborn Pmga gives 
her .up, ,having enjoyed all her enjoysblecr."--(6vot4hatara Upanigad). The a p h o r b  
under dimwion explains only the meaning of thi6text. 
I 
l 
Inaamach M the knowable, although destroyed in relation to one, exit& in relation 
.to another Puruqa, the powerr of eeeing (consciouenees) and being seen (the knowable) 
are permanent,mnd the ebrnity of their conjunction is hereby explained. The aufhor 
8t.W the ooncorrence of the & a m i s  with t h b  position :-' Ae it has been said.' 
The 
'chrrooterized,' La, the qualities are in eternal conjunction with the eelves (the &tmQs). 
Henoe their co Junction with the characteti8tice,j. e., the phenomenal state of Mahat, b., 
b 
eternal. Although the oonjunction of the Mahat, &ce, with each one of the P u r y ~  
bee an end, notwithstanding its having had no beginning, yet the conjunction of all of 
them with the Mahet, &ce, haa no end, as these are common to all. It is for thie ramn 
that the words nsed are ' characteristice only.' 
The author shows the generic qualities 
pervading all the phenomena of that class by using the word "only." 
It is for tM8 
m a o n  that although the conjunction ot one Paruga with one manifeatation of the prinelple 
of Yahrt has ceesed to exist, the aonjunotion of another Puruga with another rnanif&a,. 
tion of the Mahat hae not beoome a thing of the p ~ t .  It h=, therefore, been spoken of 
.e ever-pwent (Nityo).-P. 
l 
I 
W- Sva, of being owned. Fnh Sv&mi, 
h d s J h ? n i i i & :  
&W: 
&ktyob, of the 
porere of both. W- SvsrQpa, of the naturee. 
Upabbdhi, the recogni- 
tion. Q: Hetub, that bringa about. a7n: Samyogab, conjunction. 
23. Conjunction is that which brings about the re- 
cognition of the natures of the power of owning and the 
capacity of being owned.--74. 

B 
140 
PATANJALI'S Y OQA. 
VYASA. 
This aphorism was compo~ed for the purpose of efplsining the 
nature of con junction. ' Conjunction is that wh ich briugs about the 
recognition of the natures of the power of owning and the capacity of 
being owned.' The Purugs is the owner. ' The knowable ' is whatever 
is owned. The former ia conjoined to the latter for the purpose of know- 
ing. The cognition of the kuowable which follows from that conjunction 
is enjoyment. The knowledge, however, of the nature of the kuower ir, 
emancipation. Conjunction, therefore, ends when it has caused knowledge. 
Knowledge is, therefore, called the cause of separation. 
Knowledge i s  the 
contracditory of ignorance. Therefore, ignorance is said to be the reason 
for con junction. 
Here knowledge is not the cause of freedom (Mokga) ; 
because the absence of Ignorance itself, meaning as it does the absence 
of bondage, is freedom (Mokga). When knowledge comes into existence, 
ignorance which is the cause of bondage disappears, and with it the 
bondage which is caused thereby. It is for this reason that knowledge, 
the ~eeing of the true nature of things, is said to be the cause of 
Kaivalya (absolute independence, standing alone.) 
And now what is this Ignorance (adardana), this absence of know- 
ledge? Is it a function of the qualities ? 
Or, is it the non-reproduction 
of the mind which after having shown all the objects to the Puruga has 

ca. 11. 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 23. 
141 
become latent ? That there should be absence of knowledge notwithstand- 
ing the presence of the knowable or the thing owned, is also unreasonable. 
Is it again the purpossfulness of the clutllitics ? Or, is it Nescience which 
has passed into the state of latency with its own appropriate mental state, 
and has become the seed which produces tlk mind appropriate to its 
own manifestation? Is it again the manifestation of the potency of 
motion, on the potency of rest. having expended itself. i t  has been said 
on tllis subject, t h t  the PraclhLna., the material cause of all manifestation, 
mould become what it is not, if it te11de.d only to rest, because in that 
case tliero would not be any manifestation into phetiomena 
. ; nor would 
I 
it be what it is, if it were to remain in constant motion, because in that 
case, the phenomena would become eternal and never disappear. It is 
only when it tends to both these states, tbat it can be called the PradhOna I 
apply to any other causes that ~nigllt be imagined. 
I 
Some say that Tguorance (adwdau:~) is not11 i ng but the power 
which manifests as knowing (dardana). Ae the text saga, ' The activity 
of the Yradhha is for the sake of showing herself.' 
Others say that lgriorance (adarsana) ia the characteristic of both the 
knower (Purusa) and the knowable, because the Purusa possesses only the 
power of knowing all that may be known, but does not lmow, before the 
setting in of manifestation ; and the knowable possesses only the capacity 
of causing all effects, but is not known at the time. Here this knowledge, 
though of the very nature of the, knowable, stands in need of the incoming 
of the I'urupa for its achievement, and is therefore a characteristic of the 
knowable. Again nltllough it is not of the nature of the Purusa, yet 
depending as it does for its completio~l upon the illumination of the 
knowable, Ignorance loolts as if it were a characteristic of the Puruga. 
Some again say that Ignorance is seeing or knowing (dardana) only. 
These are alternative conceptions of the teaching only. 
This mani- 
foldnes~ of alternative conceptions is the common ground for the con- 
junction of the qualities with all the Puruy~i1.--74. 
Thus then having deacribed the cause of conjunction to be the achievement of the 
objects of the Puru$s and having further described the concomitant eternity of the 
Yrlrdhlina as well as the cause of the conjunction common to all the Puru~as, this aphorism 
was composecl to explain the nature of the conjunction which is not common to all the 
Parups but pertains on1 y to the individual : - h  
Con junction is the cauee of the recognition 
of the nature of tile power of owning and the capacity of being owned.' Inasmuch as 
the knowledge is for his rake, the Puruea enjoying the benefits conferred by it, becomes 
its owner, and the knowable becomes its own (possession). This correlation of theirs 
\ 
% 

IBA TANJALI'S YOGA. 
king determined as it ie by the nature of the powers themselves, becomes the cause of 
the recognition of their natures. It is this that is illuminated by the Couime~ltary :- 
L' The P u r o ~ e  is t h e  owner." 
On account of fitness only as such, he is conjoined with the 
knowable as its own by virtue of its fitness again, The rest is easy. 
Very well. The recognition of the nature of the seer is czllcd emancipation (Apavar- 
ga) because by the instrumentality thereof ono is drawn away from the conjunctiun. 
I'erfoct frecdom (bfokp), however, is not a thing which can be brought about by meam 
of anything. It would, therefore, certaiuly fall-short of perfect freedom. For this mason 
he says :-Con junction, therefore, ends when it has caused knowledge ; the conjunctiob, 
that is to my, of the individnal l'ura9a with the individual Will-to-be. Therefore, know- 
ledge is called the cause of separation. 
But then bow is it that the conjiinction ceases with the attainment of knowledge. 
Ha says that :-' Knowledge is t h e  cou tradic tory of ignorwrce, &C.' What then ? For 
this reason h e  says :--' Ignorance, i.e., Nescience is slid to be the reason for conjunctidn.' 
Further he illuminates the same meaning :-4 
Here knowledge is not the cause of freedom 
(Mokqa), &C.' 
well, but knowledge may remove ignorauco being contradichry .thereto ; how can 
bondage be removed ? For this reason he says :--'When knowledge comes into existence 
&G: 
The meaning is that perfect freedom (Moksa) is the establishment of the sell irl 
its own nature, quite independent as he is of t h e  Will-to-be ; and that the means ~vhereby 
it is brought about is not knowledge, but the removal of ignorance. 
In order to establish the particular ignorance which is the cause of the conjunction 
to all the Puruaas, he now sets out the alternative forms of ignorance as such :-' And 
now what is, &C.' 
IIe suggests a theory :--a 
1s it a function of the qualities, &C.' 
The 
function of the qualities is their power of bringing about effects. It is by virtue of 
that that conjt~nction becomes the cause of creation (SamsBra). 
Taking up the form of denying what seems to be implied, he states the second 
alternative :--'Or 
is it, BC.' The moaning is that the mind by whom the objectcl, each 
sound, &C., and the mental manifestation of the distinction between the Puruqa and 
the OJ,jective Existence are shown, is not born along with these states. He oxplains the 
same :-' Iu its own knowability, that is, sound, &C., and the manifestation in the mind of 
tho distinctive natures of the Poru?a and the essence of matter, the Pradlrina ia active 
only so long rs tho two-fold knowledge has not been brought about. When tho two-fold 
knowledge has been brought about it ceases to act.' This is another suggestion throws 
out, 
Now he mentions t h e  third alternative :--a 
Is it again the purposefulness of the 
qualities.' 
The meaning is that inasmuch as the effect always existe, enjoyment md 
emancipation which have to manifest in the future, exist though net predicable in the 
present. 
l 
Re suggests the fourth alternative in the same form of suggestive interrogation :- 
'Or is it Nescience, &C.' The suggestion is that it may be Nescience which at the t i m e  
of every creation goes into the state of latency of the Pradhgna having been drawn in 
along with it8 own mind and then becomes the seed for the production of the same mind 
bp its own potentiality. For this reason it is the residual potency of Nescienco which 
ie different from knowledge that is called Ignorsnce. 
He states the fifth alternative in the same form of a suggestive question :-g 
1s it 
that the potency of motion of the Pradhina, the potency, that% to say, which is reapon- '. 
sible for incliail~g the Pradhrtna, towards the manifestation of effects, ie oswntialized on 
the potentiality of rest which lives in the PradhAaa and which consist8 in the continued 
suocessive manifestation of the modification of equipoise, coming to an end ? Be stakm the 

CH. II 
ON TEE PRACTICE OF YOQA, 23. 
I 
teaching of another school in support of the existence OP both these potencies :--'It h- 
been said on this subject,' by those who deuy the existence of the one only. The Pvadhitrta 
is that by which the world of modi0cations is crested. If that Prndllciirn always tend 
towards rest and never towards motion, then it cannot create any modification and must, 
therefore, become the contradiction of itself. If again it go on always moving and never 
tend to pest, theu he says :-' If it were to remain in constant motion, &C.' 
In some places the reading of both the words sthiti ' and ' gati,' is in the dative 
case. In that case t h e  dative case and the word ' evs ' are to be read as meaning tho 
same thing. If it did not go into the state of rest, then no lnodiflcatiou would disappear ; 
and if 8 thing which exists does not disappear, it can never also re-appear ; and thus 
there would be no modifications. In this view nothing mould ever be created, and thus 
there would be no Pradhlna. It is by motion and rest, both alternatiog, that this cause 
becomes Pradhbna, not otherwise. If only one of these alternative states were admitted 
theu not only it1 the case of PradhPna, but in the case of other Birst Causes, such as 
Yarabrahma, M&yP, atoms, &C., also the same discussion mould be relevant. These causes 
too would be no causes, if they mere to remain in constant rest, because in that case they 
wonld not produce effects. They would similarly be no causes, if they were to remain in 
constant motion, because in that case, the modifications themselves becoming eternal, no 
neoessity would remain for a cause, 
He states the sixth alternative again as a suggestive interrogdion. "Some say 
that Ignorance is nothing bot the power which manifests as knowing (dargana), It is 
mid in the case of the Prajgpati vow, ' Do not see the rising sun.' 
This signifies the 
mental mood which CO-exists with and is responsible for the act of seeing not. 80 also i~ 
the case of ignorance too the denial of knowledge means that, CO-existent with the absence 
of knowledge, there is a power which takes its origin therein and which with the object 
of bringing about the knowledge termed enjoyment, &C., joins the knower to the knowable. 
He cites a Vedic text in support of the same subject : -' The activity of the Pradhina 
is, &C.' 
Grant that the Pradhiina becomes active for the pnrpose of showing herself as the 
Vedic text says ; but it is not t h e  power of knowing the nature of the self that becomes 
active. Ror this reason he says :-L 
The Purusr possessing the power of knowing all that 
may bo known, &c,' It is not the object of showing herself that only sets the Praclhha 
into activity, because before the setting in of activity. it could not be said whether it 
possessed the power of being seen. Hence it is the capacity of being seen that set8 in 
activity. This the Vedio text says by implication. 
This is the sixth alternative, that the power of seeing (knowing) @pen& upon the 
Pmdhlna. Now he states the seventh alternative, which takes up the position that the 
power of knowing depends upon both. ' Ignorance depends upon both, &C.' 
Ignorance, 
i.e., the power of seeing is thu charaoteristio of both the Purusa and the knowable. Such 
is the position of some (thinkers.) 
This may be allowed with regard to the knowable, because all the powers have it 
.s their substratum. W e  cannot, however, allow it with regard to the Purusa. -The power 
of knowing has not t h e  Purusa for its substratum, because knowledge does not eilter into 
the Purusa to make a part of him. If it did, the Yurusa would become changeable. (He 
would not remain the constant factor which he is always found to be in all mental pheno- 
mena). Bor this reason he say8 :-' Here this knowledge, &C.' 
. 
Let it then be of the nature of the ' knowable.' 
In that case knowledge, being a 
modification of the constituent energy of the ' knowable ' m %. st also be un-in telligent by 
nature. It could- not, therefore, perform the function of the knowing a s  a chawcferi8tb 
' of the knowable. The non-intelligent is not self-illuminating. 
For this reason know- 
lew becomes s charaoteristio of the ' knowable,' ouly with reference to the incoming 

of the knowor, the sell, the reflection of conscioundess therein. This is known by the act 
indicating the actor. 
Well but this too makes.knowledgt, to be a chnrscteristio of the knowable, not at the 
eame time a chavacterio tic of the Puruqa too. For this reason he Rays :--L 
Agair. although 
it is not of the nature of the PLIPURR, 
&C.' The essence of matter is certainly not of the 
nature of the P u r u p  Btilktho incomingol theD~uru4& 
i.e., t h e  reflection of c'onsciou~ 
ness on which the act of knowing the knowable oasenae of the Will-to-be depends, makes 
it possible that the act of knowing be spoken of as it were to be an sat of the Pnrup. 
although not really so. This ia the meaning. The characteristics of the Will-to-be shine 
forth as the characteristics of conscibusness, bccau~le consciousness and the Will-to-be 
appear to be one, on account .of the Will-to-be always carrying the reflection of consoioua- 
ness along with itself. 
H0 now mentions the eighth alternative:--%orno 
say that the seeing, ii.e., the 
knowing of sound, &C., is itself ignorance, not that of bhc dintinction between tllo Pnrqa 
and the Objective Essence. This is the a m e  al that tlae power of seoing, although an 
authority for the perception of colour, is no authority for the porccption of taste, &c. This 
. 
is tho meaning. The cognitions of sound, &C., as pleasurable appearanc89, &c, point to 
the conjunction of the knower .and the knoimble,, beoauso it is necessary for their 
aohievement. 
All the alternatirTe theories have been described. In order to accopb the fonrth 
alternative, he reject0 all the otIhers, bcesuse 311 the other alternative conceptions of the 
teaching of the Stnkhyn, hcing common to all the Pnrueas lead to the ahaonce of variety 
of experience :-U 
These aro the alternative conceptions of the teaching, &C."--4% 
m Tmya, its. Q: Betnb, effective cause. dkn Avidya, nescience. 
24. Ne~cience is its effective cause.--75. 
The effective cause, however, of the conjunction of the individu.al 
conscionmess with its own Wil l-to-be is Nescience, which means the 
potency of the habit of unreal cognition. The Will-to-know, possessed as 
it is of the aroma of the habits of unreal cognition, doe6 not culminate 
into the knowledge of the self, which is the end of its work, and thus 

CH. I L  
ON TRE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 75. 
145 
having still a duty to perform, comes back. 
When, however, it leaches 
the culmination of its work, mllicb is the attainment of the knowledge of 
the Puruga, its work is achieved, ignorance is gone, the cause of bondage 
no longer remains, and it does no longer come back. 
Someone ridicules this position by the story of tbe impotent hus- 
brmd. A .foolish wi Fe thus acldreseed her husband : -" My dear, my ister 
haa got children. Wl~erefore I-ieve I none ? " He mid to her :-" I shall 
beget children unto thee when I am dead." Similarly, thk knowledge 
while in existence, does not cause the mind to cease from action ; what 
hope i.8 there that it will carme cessntion when suppressed ? Says on 
this subject W teachor very nearly perfect : -" 
Is not hfokfia (freedom) 
the cessation of the Will-to-be itself and notlning else ? The Will-to-be 
ceases to act wheu. the cause of ignorance no longer remaitla. 
The Ig- 
norance which is the cailse of bondage is removed by knowledge. 
Moksn 
(perfect freedom) then is only the cess&n 
of the mind from its work. 
Wherefore then this mental confusion out of placef? "- 75. 
a- 
VACHA~PATIXI Q J I O S ~  
In order to establish the fourth alternative he introduces the aph~rism:-~The 
effective cause, however, of the conjunction, &C.' bIndividusl conacioueness' :-The 
word 
Pmtyak-chetana in the text means conecionsness which cognizes by reflex action, and rur 
tbe conjunction which makes it possible is not common to all the Yurn8aa, and is the 
oonjuuctioa ot one Pi~rusr with his own independent Will-&be, variety of experience is 
effeccted. (Hence tho translation Individual Consciousneso). 
He reads the aphorism : ---' 
Nescience isdts effective cause.' 
But Nescience is Unreal 
Cognition. It is duo to tbe con junction of consciotisness mi tll t h e  individualized \Vi 11-to-be 
just as other experiences and emancipation are due to it. If the Will-to bo is not con- 
joined to conscioueness, thero can be no existence for unreal cognition. How is it then 
that Nwcience is the cause of any kiud of cognition ? For this reason ho says :-- 
a Which 
rnaaos the residual potency of Unreal cognition.' The Noscience of other creations drawn 
in with the mind in which it manifested, live in t h e  PradhPna in thu abape ol potential 
energy. Tho Pradblna, possessed rrs it is of the aroma of this potential energy, evolves 
oaf of ibelf, the WilCtobo of a particular P u r u p ,  just 
it 
before. Similarly in 
the mgdw order of each croation preoeding another. The ordor or oroation M n g  eternal 
no defect ari3es in the theory. It is for this reason that the Puruga is not free at the 
time of each creation. IFOr tbis reason he says :-l The Will-to-be possessed as it is, &C.' 
When, however, the knowledge of the Poruaa reaches its end, dhedi &&g came of 
bondage in the shape of the residua of unreal cognition RO 1 0 n ~ r  
exists, snd'kt doea not 
come back. Par this reason hc says :-' When, however, it reaches its culmination, &C.' 
Hen, some nihilists ridicuk this state of absolu6e independence (Kaivalya)' bp 
mh+in& the sto'ry of the impotent hrband. The aotlioi tells the atofy of 6he i.mpti&fi@ 
hosband :-'l 
A foolish wife, &C." 
Wherefore " in the translation stands for M 
obj-t " in the original. Object hew stands for reason. The object of an act is the m 
of the wtioa. 
The author $horn the eimilari ty with tbe story of the impotent :-' Similarly, bq' 
TLI. exkf img knowledge of the dietihction betwee* ~onbci&nese and the qnaliti- 
18 

146 
PdTAN J A  LP's YOGA. 
-- 
d o e ~  not cruso mental cessation; what reason ia there that higher leslmleseneea, the 
light of knowledge done will make the mind to disnppear alter having restrained it along 
with its residual potency? The effect of something exists only so long as the cause 
iteell exists. It does not remain in existence when the cause ceasss to exist. HB refntea 
tlria by quoting the reasoning of a teacher who agrees on ',his point :-' gays on this 
aubject a teacher, &c! 
A teacher. very nearly perfect thoqgh not altogether. is called ,i(:~ryudesa.' As 
a 
tcacller V&yu has described hi8 qualities thus :-' One ia called an h h & r y a  
hecause he understande the meaning of the teaching (iiistra) wcll, establiehos one in 
right corlduct also, and &o himself keeps the right line of action.' 
\ \  
Moksa (absolute freedom) is only tlm cessation of the Will-to-be after it hag achieved 
experience and the discrimination of the distinction between t h e  Purusa and Objective 
Existence. It is not that the Will-to-be itself ceases to exist. This ceasing of the Will-to- 
know from its work of causing experience and emancipation, although tlm Will-to-know 
itself livcs on, follows immediately upon its establishment in the state of thebloud of 
1 
Virtue (Dharme Megha) whicli is t h e  ci~lmination of discriminative knowledge. He illa- ' 
minatchs t h e  same :--' The Will-to-know ceases to act when ignorance, which is t h e  cnllse of 
bondage, is removed by knowledge. The removal of knowledge (tire cessation of t h e  act 
of knowing) is brought a b u t  by higher clesirelcssneus. The meaning is t h J  perfeet 
freedom (Mok9a) exists even though the Will-ta-lmow itself lives on.' 
Having described 
the opinion of the teacher, h e  now gives his own :--' Moksa then is only t h e  ~essrrt~ion 
of - t h e  
mind from its work.' 
* 
But it has been said that when t h e  act of knowhg ceases the mind itself very soon 
ceases ta exist. How is it the11 this brought about by knowledge ? For this reason he 
says :-' Wherefore then this mental confusion quite out of place 3' 
The con~truction is 
as follows :-We 
Inay be taunted thus if we !wlieve that knowledge is the direct cause 
of the cessation o f  the mind. We, howvevcr, \ay down t h a t  discriminative knowledge 
becomes useful in establishing the P u w p  in its own natorc, when having reached the 
highest point, by the successive appearancw of the higher and higher stages of the inhibi- 
tive trance, it comes to coexist with the state of mortal csssatiou. How then have wo 
laid onrselves out for a taunt ? --24. 
Stitra 2e;. 
J 
q Tad, its. 
iagm? AbhLvbt, on account of disappearance. W: Savyo- 
&bh avah, the disappearance. 
Abh&vnh, of con junction. (a). 
Hlnam, re- 
moval. 9 
Tnd, thab. @: Dtideb, of the knower. &my ICaivalyam, abeolute freedom. 
25. Removal is the disappearance of conjllnction on1 
account- of its disappearance that is the absolute freedom 
of the knower.-76. 
J 
The pain that Ims to be relnoved has been tlcscr-i bed, as also what 
is called conjunction, the cause of the pain to be rerooved, together wit11 

C H .  11. 
ON TEIE PRACTICE OP YOGA, 76, 77. 
147 
the reaspn of its existence. 
Removal has to be discussed henceforward. 
4 Removal is the disappearance of conj unction brought about bp its dis- 
appearance ; that is, the absolute freedom of the kuower. The meaning 
is that on the disappearance oE the conjutwtion of the Purusa and the 
Will-to-be being brought about by the disappearance oE ignorance, 
bondage is for ever rern~ved. Tllis is removal. 
This is the freedom of 
the seer (Paruya). It means his not gett iog ~nixed up again, i.e., not 
9 
being conjoined spin with the ' qualities. -76. 
Having thus described two departments of the science, now he introduces the 
aphcrism for describing the third :-l The pain that has been removed is the fahre pain. 
Removal is the disappearance, &C.' 
Explains.:- -' The meaning is Cc.' Because there is 
disappearance of conjunction oven in the-state of the Great Latency (Mahdpralaya), the 
words ' for ever ' have been used. The.removal is the cessation of pain. This shows that 
the object of the renioval Is the fi~lfilment of the objects of the Puruya. The rest is 
easy.--25. 
Siitt'a 26. 
Pain is~removetl on the removal of the cause of pain. 
In the,rernovd 
of pain consists the establishment of the Pnrusa in its awn natwe. What 
them is the means of attaining the state of this 'removal oE pain? ' Dis- 
crirninative knowledge  ind disturbed is the means of the removal.' 
Discriminative knowledge is the recogn i tion of the distinct nature8 
of the Purufia and the Esfience of matter (Sattva). This, however, remains 
shaky as long as false knowledge has not been removed. When false know- 
ledge has its seed burnt up and thns beconles incapable of fruition, 
then the dirt of disturbing energy (Rajas) being removed, mental essence 
is in the state of the highest purity and possesses the consciousne~e of 
the highest power ; and in that state flowa on the stream of the notion of 

dimhination, free f ro~n impurity. 
It is this discriminative knowledge 
undidturbed, that is the means of the removal. 
By this it is clear that 
1 
the means of removal, the path of Moksa (absolote freedom), is the burning 
of the seed of false kaowledge, so that it may not sprout again.-77. 
VACHASPATI~S GLOW. 
The author introduces tho aphorism, in order to describe the means of removal, the 
fourth branch of bile science : -' What then, &C.' 
'' Discriminative knowledge, undisturbed 
is the means of removal." 
Discridnativo knowledge comes into existence by verbal and 
f 
inferential cognition also. The knowledge so obtained does not remove the actua1 or 
potential outgoing energies of the mind. In the case of such discritninative knowledge 
P 
they always return to action. It is with the object of excluding the discriminative know- 
ledge thus acquired, that .the word & Undisturbed' is usod. Undisturbed means &free 
from false knowledge.' Disturbance is false knowledge. This is the meaning. Dis- 
criminative knowledgo should be obtained by the teaching which collsists of verbal 
knowledge. It sl~oulcl then bc established in the mind by reasoning. It should be carried 
to its highest limit of ilIulnination by devoted attention for s long time without iaterrup- 
tiou and with reveronce. Then does discriminative knowledge become direct. False 
knowledge is removed together with its residua. It becomes undi8turl~ed.. This is the 
means of removal. The rest of the Cou~luen tary is easy.-26. 
Siltra 27. 
m 'rasya, hi3. 
SaptadhB, is sevenfold. m-@: 
PrAota-blBmilj, final 
* - A  
at each stage. 
apt Prajna, discrimination. 
l 
// 
27. His discrim.ination becoming final at each stage, . 

CB. 7I. 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 78. 
149 
/ 
This is as follows :-(l) The pain to be removed is known. 
Nothing 
furttler remains to be known of it. (2) The causes of pain to be removed 
have been done away with. (3) Removal has become a fact of direct 
cognition by means of inhibitive trance. 
(4) The means of lrnowledge 
in the shape oE discri minstive knowledge has been understood. 
This is tile four-fold Ergedonz of coi~sc.iolls discrimination from ex- 
Will-to-be has done its duty. 'L1he ' qutzlities ' tending to become latent 
\ 
into their cause, distlpppar along with it, fiuding 110 support as they do, 
like stones rollel down from the edge oE n hill-top. 
Nor once passed into 
latency, do they come back to life again, there b e i q  nu object for it. In 
this state the Puruas, having passecl beyoucl the liruits of the relation with 
9 
the ' qualities, reinnills only the light of his own pore nature a d  is free. 
1 1  
lllc Puru~a who has seen successively these seven stages of discri- 
mi~latiou is called ' adept " (kudals). He remains free and wise even when 
tile mind is resolved iuto its cause, because he has passed beyolld the 
~yllere of the ' qualities.'-78. 
The author describes by the aphorism the iiature of the finality of the perfection of 
discriminative knowledge:-'His 
discrimination beconling final at each stage is seven- 
fold.' 
Uxplains :-' His, &c. 9 
He in whom tho discrimination has just up into cousoiousncss, is the Yogi, in whom 
the mental phenomenon is prosent at the time. 
His 'consideration of attaintuentw,' mesus the senfliug back of his thought over the 
whole ground that has already bceu passed over. 
The veil of impurity of the mental eascnce is the same as dirt. When that is 
removed, m d  who11 conscque~ltly, ' the meiltal notiou is not further produced,' i.e., the 
outgoing energy of the notions due to the qualities of disturbance (rajas) and iuertia 
(talnils) is no lwger active, he reaches tho fiual point iu a stag0 01 undisturbed di$crimi- 
native k no wledge. This consciooslless of discrimination of his is seven-fold, i.e., of seven 
descriptious only. The difference of duscriptroes of consciousness i8 duo to the difference 
of its objects. 
X 
The st:qps, i. ., thestates are spoken of as each bccosning tit~sl, boosuse each as 
such reaches its ultimrto and highost point. The ultimate and highest point is that 
beyond which there is no goill t of its culmination The stages of consaiousl~ess, i.e., of 
discricuinativo koowladge, each ' of which roach- 
i tg culmination, ara spoken of ss 
becoming final at each stage. ' 
Now he describes thcae eeveo stages, cach reaching its own culmination :--b 
That 
as follows, &C.' 
Out of t.he tour stages which are brought about by the effort of man, he illuitrates the 
flrst :-b 
The pail1 to be removed has b e n  known.' Whatever has its origin in the Pra- 
clhano is certainly pain, by reason of the pains of consequence, anxiety and habitus- 
tion, and by reason of the coutnriety of the modifications of tho qualities.' It hss, there- 
fore, to 
removed. I b is tbn t which has been known. He shows its, finality:--' nothing 
further remaim to be known of it,' 

L 
_- 
He ~nelltions the second stage :-' The causes ...... have been dono away with.' 
He 
speaks of the finality :-' Nothing more of them, &C.' 
Efe mentions the third :-'The removal which is brol~gllt about by inhibitive trance, 
has been made by me a fact of direct cognition, ascertained by i n t e r i d  perception, while 
I am in the state of Cognitive trance only. It is to be tmderstood that nothing further 
of it remains to be ascertained." 
He mentions the fourth':-" 
The means of removal in tlm shape of discrirniuative 
knowledge has been understood, i.e., has been brought into existeuce. It is to be nnder- 
stood that tl&e is nothing more of it to bc brought into being. This is the four-fold 
freedom of conscioilsiicss from external phenoi~ena. Brcecloln means their cnding. The 
fact of their being the objects of huinau effort has been shown by their l~eing external 
phenomena." 
Now he speaks of t h e  freedom from t h e  ntind, which is i)~*orcgl~t 
about after the 
states brought about by human etIort aud which does not clcpcl~d upon eflort :-' Thc frec- 
dom from the tuil~d is, howev~r, three-iold.' EIo men tioris the first : -' Thc Will-to-l)c has 
9 
r 
cloue its duty. 
i'he lucni~i~~g 
is that i t  has achieved cxpcrie~loc: and cmoocip,ztioll. He 
lueiitioils the secold : - ' The yuslities, &C.' 
He shows their finality :-' Nor once passed 
into latency, &C.' 
He mentions the third:--'In.tbis state, &c. i n  this statc the P u r y r  even while 
in life, is called free and wise ; because this is his h r j b  birth. Hu s a , p  this : -' The Puruya 
who has seen ill succession these, &C .' IIe says t h a t  this state is nth dependent upon 
the mind :-G 
He retnaitis frce ancl wise e v m  when the mind is resolved into its cause, 
because he has passed beyold the sphere of the qualities.'-27. 
Yoga, of yoga. 
Ahga, of the accessories. a y m ~  
~nustilbnbd, 
. . 
by the 
. sustained practice. m ~duddlii, of impurity. .dd Ksaye, 
. 
on the destruction. 
m JfiBna, of wisdom. 
Dlptib, the light. 
W h, reaching up to. W Viveka, 
of discrimination. d: 
Khyhteb, the knowledge. 
28. 
On the destruction of impurity by the sustained 
P ractice of the accessories of Yoga, the light of ivisdom 
reaches up to discriminative knowledge.-- 79. 

CR. 11. 
ON T H E  PRACTICE OF YOGA, 79. 
Discriminative lmomledge becomes the means of removal, when 
achieved. There can be no acl~ievement without the adoption of the 
means thereof. This, therefore, is taken up. 
" By the sustained practice 
of the accessories of Yoga is impurity clestmyed and tl~en the light of 
wisdom s l h e s  up to d iscrinlinative knowledge.' 
The accessories of Yoga are eigh tl, to be fui-ther named. 
C _  
RV 
* their 
sustained practice is destroyed the fivefold uurenl cognition, which is of 
the nature of impurity. 
Destruction means disappearance. 
~ l ; e n  that 
is destroyed, red knowledge is manifested. 
As the means of achieve- 
ment are being practised more and more, go is the impurity being attenu- 
ated more' and more. 
And as more and more of it is being destroyed, so 
also goes on increasiug mare and more t1he light of wisdom following in 
the wake of destruction. This increase reaches its culmination in discri- 
lninative knowledge. 
This weans that its highest culmination is in 
the knowledge of the nature of consciousness and the ' qualities.' 
TLe practice of the nccessm-ics of Yoga is the cause bf the separa- 
tion of impurity, as the axe is the cause of the separation of the piece 
of.wood cut off thereby. It is, however, the cause of the attainment of 
discriininatire knowledge, as virtue is the cause of happiness. 
It ip, not 
a cause otherwise. 
Well, how many of these causes are there in the Teaching? They 
bave been said to be nine only as follows :-' A cause is said to operate 
- 
in nine way8 :-As 
the cause of birth, of preservation, of manifestation, 
of modification, of sequential cognition, of attainment, of separation, cf 
differentiation, of upholding.' 
Of these the cause of birth : the mind is of knowledge. 
The sustaining cause : the achievement of the objects of the Prxruga 
is of the mind, as food is of the body. 
The cause of manifestation is as light is the cause of the manifes-; 
tntion of colour ; as also tbe knowledge of colour. 

The cause of change or modification is, as for example, a different 
objectof the mind. 
Or fire of the food that is cooked. 
'I'lle cause o E secluel~ ti:d cognition is as the knowledge of smoke ia 
of the knowledge of fire. 
The cause of attainment is as the practice of the accessories of Yoga 
of the atteinlnellt oE discriminative knowledge. 
r rile cause of separation is ss the same of impurities. 
The cause of cliffsren tintion is as the goldsmith i~ of gold. Simi- 
larly, as in the case oE the oqo notion oE the same woman, Nescience 
causes forgetfulness ; anger makes it painful ; desire makes it pleasur- 
able ; the knowledge of ~*ealities 
makes it indifferent, neither pleasurable 
nor pai n fill. 
The osuse of upl~uldii~g 
is as the body i s  of the organs, of serlsntion 
and actiou and vice ver.3~ ; the elements of the bodied and each oE these 
mutually of a1 l the otlum. S:, also the animals, men and gods each of the 
othera. 
Thus there are nine descriptions of causal operations. These 
..re to be applied to other objects also as may be 
As to the prac~ice of 
the accessorie~ of Yoga they operate as cause in two ways only:--79. 
Now then having described t h e  four departments of t h e  science, and seeing that 
the discriminative knowlcdgo which as the means 01 removal falls within these dopnrt- 
rnents, has not been achieved Iiko cow's milk, &C.+ (which although existing in the udders, 
is not obtained until it is drawn out) :&h4 furthor seeing that this cannot be ael~ieved 
without employing some means, he goes on to describe the means : -' Discriminative 
knowledge becomes the means, &C.' 
Here shows by t h e  aphorism in wlmt way does the means of tnowlodgo operate as 
a cause of discrirnin.ttivo knowlcdgo. 'Orl the destruction of impurity, &C.' 
The acces- 
sories of Yoga d e s t r o ~  impurity by operating as may be along visible and invisible lines. 
It should be understood that t h e  five branches of Untrue cogl~ition are spoken of here as . 
indicative of virtue and vice also, 'because they too are of the nature of impurities, being 
as they are the. causes of life-stata, life-experience and life-period. 
The rest is easy. 
A cause is seen operating in more ways than one. In what does the practice of 
Yoga operate as the cause ? For this reason he says : -- 
' The practice of the accessories of Yoga, &c. ' The cause of impurity being re- 
moved, means that it separates impurity from t h e  essence of the Will-to-be. 
He gives an 
illustration : -' As the axe, &c. ' The hatchet separates t h e  tree to be cut from the root. 
\ 
Further, having separated the essence of the Will-to-be from impurity, it leads it to 
the attainment of discriminative knowledge, as obedience to law is the means of the 
attainsent of happiness. Sitnilarly is the practice of Yoga accessories the means of the 
attainment of discriminative knowledge. There is no other way in which the cause 
operates. He says this :-' It is the cause of attainment. &C.' 
Inasmuch as it is said 
that there is no other way in which it operates, he puts the question, How many are the 
ways of operation altogether? He answers : They are nine only.' 
He enumerates them 
by a verse :-'Birth, 
preservation, &C.' Now he illustrates them : ' The cause of birth, 
&C.' 
The mind operate8 to bring knowledge from the state of being nnpredicaMe into 
'* 

CP. If. 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOQ.4, 19. 
153 
the etate of present existence ; it is, therefore, the cause of the birth of knowledge. The 
fulfilment of the purpom of the Puruy, is the cause of the preservation of the mind. Born 
of the principle of egoism, the mind is preserved as long as it has not fulfilled both the 
objects of the Purnsa. When, however, both the objects of the Parnga have been fulfilled, 
if is no longer preserved as such. For this. reason the nou-akhievement of the objects of 
the Puru?a- is the cause of the preservation of the mind, after it ha8 been born out of it8 
cause. He gives an illustration :-'As food of the body.' 
Manifestation means the placing of an object under certain conditions so that they 
may help in the act of'perception either by means of the sensos or by the act of the mind 
itself ; as light is the cause of the manifestation of colour. 
The cause of change or modification of the mind is an object other than that which 
has possession of the mind at the time. So g m  
the story. Mrik&ndn was sitting with 
his mind entranced. ' He heard tho dItL note of tho musical scale emitted by a creeper 
that was ripening. He at owe opened his eyes, and what did he see? The fair and youth 
fa1 nymph Pramlocha. The sight of her beauty drew away his mind from the object of 
his then mental appli ation, and his mind became attached to her. He gives an illns- 
tration of this :--'As fire is of the things cooked.' 
When raw, the particles of rice, &C., 
are so close as to make them hard to be separated. By cooking e change is introduced. 
I 
The particles become loose. Bire operates as tho cause of change, that is, of t h e  intro- 
duction of softness instead of hardnew. 
.-_ 
It is only the knowledge of an existing object that is brdught about; by aequential 
cognition. The knowledge of smoke is the cause of the knowledge of fire. Knowledge 
is that which is known. The knowledge of Are here means the knowledge which is the 
same ss fire, the mental idea of tire. This is the meaning. It 'is by sequential cognitibn 
that it operates4as the cause of the knowledge of fire existing-in the present as the thing 
to be known. 
It is natural with cause6 to pass in to effects ; but for some reason they sometimoa 
do not pass into that state. Take, for example, water. It is the nature of water to flow 
downwards when poured on a higher level. 
Bnf an embankment may be made to check 
its downward flow. The same ifl the case here. The essence of the Wfll-to-be is by 
nature pleasing and luminous. IZ is natural for it to reach the state of happinesrr 
and discriminative knowledge. It, however, does not reach that state somehow by 
reason 'of being chocked in its operations by via; 
(adharm) or by inertia (tarnas). 
That check is romoved by virtue or by the practice of the accessories of Yoga. Its 
operations thus become unhampered ; it reaches that state, being ib natural produoer. 
will be said :-There is no operative cause to set the Srakritis into action ; but if 
pierces through the impediuients like the h~~bandman.'--h. 8. It is thus that the practice 
of the aceasories of Yoga is said to operate as the cause of the attainment of discrimina- 
tlve knowledge. With reference, however, to another effect lower down, it is described 
as the cause of separation. Thus be says :-' The cause of separation is as, BC.' 
Now he describes the aawe of diflerentiatiou :--' The cause of differentiation is 
the goldsmith of the gold.' 
Gold is both different and not different from wristlets, ear- 
rings and armlets. It is different when it is neoesssry to point out the difference ; not 
different when it is not desired to point out the difference. Thus is it different from the 
ear-ringe. The goldsmith, however, Gho makes wristlets, makes them from gold which 
igj not other than the gold of the ear-rings. He, therefore, becomee the cause of introduo- 
ing another differential altogether into the otherwise quite identical gold. He is, thew 
fore, the cause of differentiation. 
Similarly is Are the caube of the differentiation of thiugs that are cooked. It iq 
however, described above as the cause of modiflcstion. What is intended to be said there 
\ mf f he difference between cooked and raw rice, as the charrateristics of the aame 
20 

PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
qualified thing, is not intended to be conveyed; and therefore even though the two 
characteristics are born and disappear respectively, the thing qualified remains the 
same in both conditions. It is not possible to say that the thing qualified has become 
quite another thing. It is for these considerations that fire is only spoken of as the cause 
of modification. There is no overlapping. 
The meaning is not to be understood to be that different arrangement is the 
cause of differentiation, because in that case the goldsmith. in the text will be quite 
out of place. 
Having in the beginning described the - cause of differentiation in the outside 
world, now he describes the operation of the same with reference to the mind :-Similarly 
as in the case of a single notion about one woman, &c. Nescience consists in the cognition 
of lovability, &C., in a damsel. When this nescience is conpled wibh forgetfulness (moha) 
one becomes stupid, that is full of stupid imaginiags. ' Maitra is a very fortunate man 
to possess such a jewel of a wife. I am unfortunate not to possess her. In the same 
way the notion of the same woman in the mihd of a CO-wife causes aversion aud cons* 
(pent pain. Similarly, the notion of the same woman in the mind of the husband Maitra 
causes attachment and consequent pleasure. The kliomledge of the realities thereof 
consists in the recognition of the fact that the body of the woman is after all nothing 
but skin, muscle, fat, bone and mucus ; and that it is naturally itnpure on account 
of the place of its fecundatiou and the seed which grows ink) it. This knowledge in t h e  
mind of the wise becomes the cause of the idea that it is neither pleasurable nor painful ; 
and thus it becomes the cause of desirelessness. 
The cause of upholding :--The body is the upholder of the powcr of sensation and 
action. These powers again are the upholders of the body. The five forces of PrAna, 
&C., are the manifestations of the common energy of these powers. The body dies in their 
absence. Similarly, muscle and the other portions of the body support each other in life. 
Bimilarlg, are the elements'of Pgithvi, &C., the supporters of the bodies of men, of Varu~a, 
Sun, V$yu and those that live in the Chandraloka The elemeuts further support each 
other in life. The Ppitlhvi having the five qualities of odour, taste, colour, touch and sound, 
all the five elements are present therein supporting and supported by each other ; a 
also four in the Apas, three in the Tejas, two in the VByu. The animals, men and gods 
also exist sllpporting each other in life. But how can they be the supporters of each 
other, seeilig that they are not related to each other as the containor and the contained. 
For this reason he says :-' They lire for each other, &C.' 
The body of - man is sustzined 
by the materials supplied by the bodies of beasts, bird, deer, snakes and vegetables. Simid 
larly, the bodies of tigers and others of the same class are supported by the bodies of 
men, beasts, and deer, &c. Similarly, the bodies of' beasts and deer, &C., are supported by 
vegetables, &c. Similarly, the bodies of gods are supported by the sacrifice8 of goats, 
deer, clariaed butter and Purodiia, Lc., offered by men as also by means of the accessories 
of sacrifice, branches and stones, &c. Similarly, the gods also support men by giving them 
the objects of their desires and by causing rain, &c. 
Therefore do they live for each 
other. The rest is easy.-- 28. 
Sil:ra 2 9 .  
m Yama, restraint. h 
Niyama, observance. 
Asana, posture.mmm. Pr& 
&h,ma, regulation of breath. 
Pratyiihiira, abstraction. m Dh&rap$ 
concentration. gn Dhylna, meditation, 6 
Sambdhi, trance. (All these). 
Astau, 
. . 
eight, m A h a b i  the armeaaoriee. 

CH. IT. 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 80, 81. 
\ 
155 
29. Restraint, Observance, Posture, Regulation of 
breath (PrB@iyBma), Abstraction, Concentration, Meditation 
and Trance are the eight accessories of Yoga.--80. 
=m- 
e 
I * m ? i ~ ~ m m ~ - - m -  
The accessories of Yoga 
- are now determined. 
" Restraint, &ce" We 
shall now describe their nature and practice in order. -80. 
VACHASPATI~S GLOSS. 
Now the author determines the accessories of Yoga with the object of determining 
their number more or less. 
The accessories of Yoga, &C.' 
'Restraint, &C.' Practice, desirelessness, faith, energy, &C., are by their very nature 
to be understood as falling under these wherever they may properly fall, not as indepen- 
dent means.-29. 
S(lt1-a 30.. 
m Tatra, there. 
W
*
 Ahimsa, Abstinence from injurv. 
W 
Satya, 
veracity. fniiP Asteya, abstinence from theft. 
am4 Brahmacharya, continence. 
Aparigraha, Abstinence from avariciousnesa, all these. m: Yam&, are the 
restraints. 
. 
30. Of these the restraints are : Abstinence from 
injury @him&) ; Veracity ; Abstinence . from theft ; Con- 
tinence ; Abstinence from avariciousness.-81. 
\ 
Of these, abstinence from injury is the not causing of pain to any 
living creature in any way at any time. The restraints and observances 
that follow have their origin in it. They are meant to achieve it. They 

are taught with the object of teaching it. They are taken up with the 
object of rendering the light of its appearance purer. And .so it haa 
been said :--h 
the B r h n a ~ a  goes on undertaking many a vow of 
, 
restraint and observance, he goes on turning away from the sins commit 
ted on account of forgetfulness, and having their origin in injury caused 
to others (HiysL) ; and by so doing he goes on rendering the A h i y d  
itself purer and purer. 
Veracity consists in word and thought being in accord with facts. 
Speech and miud corresponds to what has been seen, heard and inferred 
as such. Speech is u~tered for the purpose of tranferring one's know- 
ledge 
% 
to another. It can only be said to have been employed for the 
good of. others and not for their injury, if it is not deceptive, confused 
or barren in knowledge. If, however, it proves to be injurious to living 
beings even though uttered as such, it is not truth ; it is s sin only. By 
this outward appearance, this i s  a fncsilnile of virtue, and one gets into 
painful darkness. Therefore, let every one exa~nine well and tlieu utter 
truth for the benefit of all living beings. 
Theft is the making one's own unlawfully of things belonging 
to others. Abstinence from theft consi~ts in the absence of tb; desire 
thereof. 
Continence is the restraint of the hidden power, the- power of 
generation. 
Absence of avariciousness ie the non-appropriation of things not 
one's own, consequent upon aeeiug the defecte of attachment and of the 
injury caused by the collection, preservation and destruction of goods. 
These are the restmint0.-81. 
VACHAS PATI'S GLOSS. 
Having enumerated the accessories of Yoga as the restraints and observances, &C., 
now he enumerates the restrain& by introducing the aphorism :--l Of theso abstinence 
l 
from injury, &G.' 
The restraints are abstinence from injury, &c. Now describes abstinence 
from injury as an accessory of Yoga : 
--l Not causing of pain, &C.* 
Qualifies such AhimsP : 
The restraints and observances that follow, &ce* 
'Have their origin in it ' :-the 
other restraints and observances whon performed 
without observing the vow of calming no pain are, as it were, not performed ; because 
in that case they are quite useless. The practice is resorted to only for the purpose of 
achieving Ahilpsg. 
If Ahimsii is tho root of all those that follow, how is it that they are meant for achiev- 
ing it? For this reason he says :--* 
They are taught with the object of teaching it.' The 
meaning is that achievement hers refers to knowledge, not to birth. 
Let that be. But if the following restraints and observances are for the purpose 
of givinga knowledge of Ahiysh, then they are of no use; because that knowledge is 
obt&md from the other sources. For this reasou he says :-4 
Bar the purposo of rendering 

CH. II. 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 81. 
157 
A- 
the light ~f its appearance purer.' 
The meaning is that if the following ones are not 
practised, Ahi~nsB would remain i~npure on account of the existence of untruth, &a. 
He mentions the concurrence of the sgamis with this :--' 
And so it has been said.' 
Now he doscribcs the nature of truth :-' Word and thooght being in accord with 
facts.' Next he describes the nature of the facts :-' What has been heard, seen and in- 
I 
ferred as such.' 
Otherwise it would not he truth. He describes this with reasoning. Speech is 
uttered with t h e  object of transferring one's thoughts to another; that is, for the purpose 
of creating in the other minds a knowledge similar to the knowledge existing in the mind 
of the speaker. For this reason, if it is not deceptive, &c. For exmple, Yudhisthira 
. 
was 
questioned by Dro~Aohiirya with reforence to tho death of his son 
M y  clear, your wealth 
is truth, is kr'wattbbml dead" ? His answer was, "It is true that A'c'watth&mb is dead," 
hut he thought ;it the time of the death of A.iwatthlmb, t!le elephant!, and not the son of 
Droya. This was merely a reply in the terms of the question. It did not transfer to the 
mind of Drona what was in the mind of Y odhigthira. The knowledge in Podhis . .  
thira's 
mind was that the elephant was dead, and this ha had obtained by the sense of his sight. 
The knowledge, however, that was transferred to the mind of D r o p  was that his son was 
dead. This is deceptive knowledge. 
' Confused speeches ' is that whioh is born from confusion. The confosion may exist 
at the time of speaking, or, at the time of ascertaining t h e  object ol knowledge. 
Barren in knowledge is that which carries no inlwmatior. As, for example, the 
knowledge of barbarians carries no impression of the objects of knowledge to the mind. It 
also means the speech which may be objectless. Sach speech is not desirable to utter. 
I n  this case, even though the kuowledge of the speaker is transferred to the mind of the 
hearer, yet it is not as it were traasferred, beoause it ig useless. 
such speech also must be uttered for the good of others. If not so uttered, it is only 
the semblance of truth, not truth. For this reason he says : --' It can only be said to be 
employed, &c. ' 
' If, however, it proves inji~rioua to living beings, &cm' Take, for example, the case of 
a man who has taken the vow of truth, being asked hy a gang of robbers if the caravan 
they be in pursui of had gassed that way. He has see11 it passing that way mid says so. 
This utterauce of his, even though technically troth, is not so ia reality, as it tends to the 
injury of others. The rest is easy. 
He now describes theft, because the abstinence from any act dvpends upon t h e  ander- 
standing of the nature of the act. 'Theft is the making of things, &C.' 
The object is 
to indicate the general by the particular. 
Inasmuch as the functioning of speech and body depends upon the mind, the mental 
modification is mentioned here as the principal factor : - - L  ~bsence'of the desire thereof .' 
Nest he describes the nature of contilience :-' The restraint of t h e  hidden power :' 
The words a hidden power," are used to signify that the mew non-use of the organ is not 
continence. The desire of sesing and speaking to women and clubracing them as the, 
seats of Cupid is also incontinence. The meaning is that thc other sensations teuding 
towards that are also to be checked. 
He doscribes the nature of .abstinence from avariciousness :-' Absence of avaricioas- 
ness, &C.' 
Here the defect of attachment has bceu described. Attachment increases in 
consequence of the repetition of enjoyment, as also the deftness of the powers in their 
functioning. 
The defect of injury also has been described. 
90 enjoyment is possible without 
causing injury to others. 

158 
PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
Absence of avariciousness is the not making one's own of objects, inasmuch as their 
I 
possession originates in undesirable means if they are not sai~ctioned by the Slstras and 
.I= obtainable without effort even ; and because there is evil clone even in the preserva- 
tion of possession&, that are obtained even in accordance with the ~lstras.-30. 
Stitra 31. 
Jbti, life-state. & DeBa, space m Kbla, time. 
849 Samaya, and 
circumstance. am&m:, 
Anavachchhinnbb, not limited by. a*: 
Sba-bhaumkb, 
universal. mq Mahhvratam, the great vow. 
31. They are theGreat Vow, universal, and noblimited 
by life-state, space, time, and circumstance. 
(Sama~a). 
e 
-82. 
4 
V Y ~ A .  
t 
And these are. the great vow, universal, not-limi ted by life-S tate, 
I 
space, time and circumstance.' 
Of these, abstinence from injury is limited to ]&-state, 
as for 
example, the inj urc 
./ inflicted by a fisherman is limited to fish alone, and 
to nolle else. The same is limited to space, as for example, in the case 
of a man who says to himself, " I shall not injure at a sacred place." 
The 
same is limited to time, as for example, in the case of a man who says to 
llilnself, " I &all not cause injury on the sacred day of d ~ e  
Chaturdndl, 
(the fourteenth) of the lunar fortnight." 
The same in the case of a man who has given up the three injuries 
is limited by circ~unstame, as for example, when a Inan sags to himself, 
" 1 shall cause injury only for the sake of gods and Brdllrnqs and not 
in any other way." 
Or, as for example, injury is caused by d d i e r s  in 
battle alone and nowhere else. The restraints of Ahimsb and the others. 
are always practised without being limited by life-state, time, space and 
circumstance. Universal is that mhich pervades all conditions of life, 
everywhere, always ; and is nowhere out of place,/ 
They are called the 
Great Vow.-82. 

CB. II. 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 82, 83. 
t 
V~CHASPATI~S 
GLOSS. 
They have been described in general. Now he introduces the aphorism in order to 
describe how they are to be observed by the Yogis. ' And these, &C.' 
They are called 
Universal, because they are known in all states, described as life-state, &C.' 
Inasmuch as 
it is said that the restraint of Ahi!ns& and the others are to be practised, the same 
limitations are to be considered as applicable in the case of other restraints also.-31. 
h, 
iaucha, cleanlinese vh Santosa, contentment. W: Tapah purificatory 
action. 
WIW SvLdhyiip, study. h ~ q h d 4 ,  f $~ara-~ra~idhana, 
the making of 
God, the motive of all action. all these fh~: 
Niyarnbh, the observances. 
32. The observances are Cleanliness, Contentment, 
Purificatory action, study and the .making of t,he Lord the 
motive of all action.-83. 
&wXtm: anv&m*m 
k m :  I m $H qm~rf2& 
a wmq I 
fta~~mrqmrq 
I ara: ufh&r- 
~TWIlmm33l I ?6h' 
I ZFf B h,&&
;3idmm~W 
a 
I a m  h t  qplMi ~
~
~
I
~
W
T
I
W
h 
$ta 
m i h  itr~mmnw& m m  w I -bmrm& af& 
- 
II W Il 
VY&A 
Cleanliness, Contentment, Purificatory Action, Study and the making 
of fdvara the motive of all actions, are the observances. 
Of these, Cleauliness is external when brought about by earths and 
water, &C., and consists in the eating of pure things, &c. 
It is internal 
when it consists in the washing away of impurities of the mind. 
Contentment is the absence of desire to secure more of the neces- 
saries of life than one already possesses. 
Purificatory action consists in the endurance of the pairs of oppo- 
sites. The pairs. of opposites are such as the desire to eat and the desire 
to drink ; heat and cold ; standing and sitting ; the absence of speech 
(Kbstha 
. . 
Mauna) and the absence of facial indications (Aktira Mauna)l 
It also includee such vows aa the fasts of CltBndrhyarpand Bantapana, 
&C., so far as necessary. 
* 
Stndy is the reading of the sciences of liberation (Moksa), or the 
repetitiou of the Pm~ava, the syllable Awn. 
The making of Pdvartl. the motive of all actions, means the doing of 
all actions to. fulfil the purpose of that Great Teacher. It is with 

reference to this state that the following has been said :-' Lying down 
on a bed or seated or wandering along a road, ever given to Yoga, with the 
network of the sins to be restrained, removed, conscious of the destruction 
of the seed of repeated births, he shares the joys of immortality." 
Then is the understanding of the indiviclual self a d  the absence 
of obstacles.-83. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
He describes the observances of Cleanliness, &c. 
'' Cleanliness, contentment, Purificatory Action, Study and the making of God the 
motive of all actions are the observances ... ...." De explains these :---" 
Cleanliness is, &C." 
The first !et cetera' means such things as cowdung plaster and other similar thi ig. 
Pure things are such as the urine of the cow, and barley, &c, which pnrifi the body by 
removing impurities. The word 'et cetera' in connection with the eating of purifying 
things means the limitation of mouthfuls in size and number, &C.' Instead af speakillg of 
the purity caused by eating, &c,, of purifying things, the words used here are only eating, 
&C., things. It is to be understood that the effect i$ meant by the mention of tho cause. 
Mental impurities are pride, jealousy, vanity, &c. Mental purity consists in their 
rom o val . 
Contentment is the absence of desire to possess more than is necessary for the pre- 
aervation of life. It slioald be added that this is because the appropriation of things not 
one's own hag already been given up. 
The absence of facial indications which let into the secret ot one's mind, is the 
control of ono's self, so as not to transfer the thought at .random. Absence of speech is 
the ordinary holding of the tongue. 
The sins to be restrained are the causing of injqry to others, lying, &C., which will 
he described later. They also include doubt q d  Untrue cognition. 
Next is described the 
sequence, on becoming purified by this much. 
Burther these restraints and observances are described in the V i g n  Puriiy :-" Let 
the Yogi practise continence, harmlessn?ss, truthfulness, abstinence from theft and non-- 
covetousness without desire of fruit ; and let him make his mind gradually fit for progress. 
He t~hould also apply himself to study, cleanliness and purificatory actions and content- 
ment ; and let hisanhibest upon t h e  Parabcahma. These are the restraints and observ- 
onoes Ave each. When practised with desire they secure special fruit. To those who 
hare no desire for fruit, they secure liberation."-32. 
... 
W Vitarka, of the thoughts of sin. 
nts;) BLdKane, on the troubling of. 
Pratipaksa, to the contrary. 
Bhhvanarn, habituation. 
33. Upon thoughts of sin troubling, habituation to 
the contrary. -84. 

CB. 71. 
ON THE PRACTICfE OF YOGA, 84, 85. 
161 
When during the practice a of the restraints and observances sinful 
thoughts give trouble, the mind is to be habituated to the contrary ideas. 
When thoughts of the sins of causing injury to others and other sins 
appear in the mind' of this devotee of wisdom, such as, ' I shall kill the 
evil-doer,' ' I shall tell lies,' ' I shall appropriate this inan's weallh,' 
' I sliall spoil this man's wife,' ' Why should I not possess the things 
which this man possesses.' 
When he is touclied by the high fever of these 
sins, which tend to push him along the wrong path, he should habituate 
himself to think upon the contraries of such sins. He sliould entertain 
such ideas as these :-Being 
burnt up as I am in the fires of the world, 
I have taken refuge in the practice of Yoga, giving as it does protection 
to all living beings. Were I to take up the sins, having once given them 
up, I sllouId certainly be a dog in my conduct. 
As the dog licks up his 
own vomit, so sho.uld I be acting, if 1 were to take up again what I have 
once given up.' This should be applied to other aphorisms also.-84. 
VACHASPATI~S GLOSS. 
There are many obstacles in the way to good things. 
Thus obstruction being 
poesible, the aphorism teaching the remedy thereof is introduced :-When these restraints 
m d  observances, &C.' 
The aphorism is, ' Upon thoughts of sin troubling, habituation to 
the contrary.' In the Commentary explaining the sins there is nothing difficult to under- 
stand.-33. 
* 
SQtra 34, 
M: Vitarkhb, the thongllts of sin are. : 
Hil?sbdayab, the causing of 
injury to others and the rest. wi Krita, d6ne. ~h 
Kbrita, caused to be done. 
d"~: 
.e 
hnumoditbb, and permitted to be done. 
Lobha, desire, fiit.9 Krodha, 
anger. 
Moha, ignorance. $M Phrvakiib, preceded by. 
Mridu, alight. m 
Madhya, middling. 
i a M :  Adhim~trbb, and intense. g:a Dubkha, pain. 
A jfiLna, unwiadom. 
Ananta, infinite. 
Phala, result, fruit. 
g:m.nm~*: 
Itesulting in an infinity of pain and unwisdom. fi Iti, thus. 
Pi-atipakaa, 
to the contrary. m Bhbvanam, thinking. 
34. The 
- 
sins are the causing of injury to others aud 
the rest. They are done, caused to be done and permitted 
21 

162 
PATANJAWS YOGA. 
to be done; they are preceded by desire, anger and ignor- 
ance; they are slight, middling and intense; their 
result is, an infinity of pain and unwisdom; thus comes 
the habit-of-thinking to the contrary.-85. 
e 
I & gim BasnBa;rg~~~ni 
@ha$ u* 
I g:3mlqm- 
*W- 
g:W?pd?f ;iitrn*maftr@ 
S m& &a?& 
d 
Z : W & ~ W  R 7 ? ? t & ~ a ~ ~ i ~ ~  
I ~ ; 9 j i + @ l i f  
W 
s t i k g y m r  @m waaq 
dqmgfiftr r 
3mi 
mmMq I gFj ftaij~ifai a m w i  h e k f  wrma & d q  cn: e- 
q@m I n h m p m ? ~ ~ m  
&m\: I m 
~ T Z I W P W ~ ~ ~
~witpaii 
m: mrqye W& l1 38 a 
VYASA. 
d 
Of these the causiug of injury to others :-It 
is oE thee deecripti~n~, 
that which is done, that which is caused to be done and that wlridA iis 
permitted to be done. Each again i~ three-fold. Prompted by d@ire 
of gain, a* in the case of one who desires to obtain fletth sud d i n  9 
prompted by anger as in the case of a man who has received some injury 9 
done through ignorance of the real nature of an act, under the impr=ion 
that the act proposed is a virtue. 
Desire, anger and ignorance are again three-fold, slight, m iddli ng 
and intense. Thus there are twenty-seven modifications of in jury caused 
to others. 
I 
Mild, middling and intense are again three-fold each ; Mild-mil 
Middlingmild, and Mild-intense. 
Also Middling-mild, MiddlingOmid 
Intense-intense, Thus injury is of eighty-one descriptions. 
\ 
dling, and iliddling-intense. Also Intense-mild, Intense-midclling, and\ 

C R .  11. . 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 85. 
1 G3 
--- 
4 
This again becomes infinite on account oE rule (niysma), option 
(vikalpa) and conjunction (samucld~ayst). Similarly should this be 
applied to untruthfulness, BC. 
The con trnry tendency consists in the notion that these immoral 
tendencies cause an infinity of pain and untrue cognition. This means 
that pain and unwisdom are the u~lending fruits of these immoralities, 
arid that in this idea lies 'the power which causes t.he habit of the con- 
trary trend of thought. 
Further more the illjurer first overpowers the strengths of the 
victim ; then gives him pain by blows from weapons ; then takes his life 
even. 
/ 
Now as a consequence of overpowering strength, his intelligent 
and non-intelligent means of enjoyment lose the power of causing enjoy- 
ment. 
By causing pain he suffers pain amollg animals, earth-bound dis- 
embodied spirits, RC., and iu hell. 
By taltir~g life he lives every moment 
C~ 
c. 
in a state of waning life. He is so much troubled that he prefers and 
J 
longs for death ; and yet, inasmuch as the effects of pain must run 
, their coLu*se, he somehow lives on. Aud if' somehow these acts of injury 
be mixed up with rirtue, he is full of enjoyment but short-lived. 
These observations may also be applied to untrutllfulneas, &C., as far 
as nlny be. Thus making lhnself familiar with the undesirable conse- 
quellces of these sins, he no longer allows his mind to rest over evil acts. The 
habituation to the contrary tendencies becomes the cause of removing the 
sins. 
Wllen these b e q n e  characterised by non-productivity, then power 
caused by them becomes, to the Yogi, the irdication of his success.--85. 
These sins having different natures, modes, characteristics and fruits, and each of 
these being an object of habituation to the contrary tendency, he now describes them by 
the aphorism, with the object of describing the nature of t h e  contrary tendency :-G 
The 
sins are the causing of injury to others, die.' 
Explains : -' Kow as the injury, &C.' Rule 
(niyama) and untrue cognition and their combinations CO-exist with the sins of injury, &c,, 
011 account of the infinity of differentiation among living beings. Then, vice causing the 
i~ltcllsification of inerkia, arises u~wisdoln also, which is nothing more than the four classes 
of untrue cognition. For this reason they fructify as unwisdom also. Thus the thought of 
tIlcir fruition as nn imii~cnsity of pain and unwisdom is also an habituation to the contrary 
t un(lcncy. Tile author renders the same contrary tendency clearer. ' First overpowers 
t l l ~  
etrength, i.e., his activity, the free motions of the body of the victim, that is the animal, 
&c,, to be killed.' 
By binding to the sacrificial pillar the animal loses the light of his life. 
l'ho rest is very plain. 
The restraints and observances have been described. The removal of their teuden- 
cler by tneans of the habituation to the contrary tendency has also been described. 
~ b r e  
being thw no ob&acles left, now he describes the indications of the success of 

164 
PA'rAIVJALI'S YOGA. 
the& practices. By knowing them the Yogi having attained what he has undertaken, 
turns towards the work which is yet to be done. Bor this reason he says :-' When these ' 
become characterized, &C.'--34. 
SBtra 35. 
m Ahimsa, of (the habit of) not causing injury. 
Pratistb$y&m, 
. . 
on the confirmation of. 
Tat, his. afir4r Bannidhau, in presence. h:Vairaty&gab 
giving up of hostilities (m) 
(&). 
. 
35. (The habit of) not-causing-inj ury being con- 
firmed, hostilities are given-up in his presence.-86. 
mm* I d&I?m~d 
h i m :  I U&$R~ 
11 3% H 
VY&A. 
As for oxsn~ple all living beings give up their hostilities in his 
presence.-86. 
L. 
V~CXASPATI'S 
GLOSS. 
Horse and buffdo, rat and cat, snake'aml mongoose, and others being natural enemier 
% 
of each other, give up their ani.mosities, by following the tendencies of the mind of the 
revered one, whose habit of not causing injury is confirmed.-36. 
Satyr, of veracity. 
Pratisth~ylm, 
. 
in the confirmation. 
Xriyb, 
of action. 
W Phnla;of fruition. 
olnrp~pq ,%$rayatvarn, the dependence of. 
36. Veracity being confirmed, action and fruition 
become dependent$.-87. 
~
~
~
I
~
~
F
Q
~
I
I
VY&A. 
m 
' Be virtnous.' This being said the object of the benediction 
becomes virtuous. ' Go to beoveo,' lie attains the heavenly state. 
His 
speech becomes effective.--87, 
VACEASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Action signifit38 virtue and vice which are the results thereof and their fruition 
oonsists in heaven and hell. They become dependents up011 hitn : they come to live in 
him.. They coiue into oxistenoe by the speech of the master. He illuutrates the depen- 
dence of action :-g 
Be virtuous! 
Illustrates the dependence of fruition :--' Go to heaven.' 
ICCffective '' means unchecked.''-36. 
Sfitra 37. 
Aeteya, of not dealing. -Pratistb&y$m, 
in the confirmation of. d 
&wa, of all, wt Ratna, of jewels 
Upaethanam, the approaching him of. 

CH. TI* 
Oh7 THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 58, 89, 90. 
l65 
37. (The habit of) not-stealing being confirmed, all, 
jewels, approach him .--88. 
VACHASPATIX GLOSS. 
This is easy.-37. 
sa tt-a 38. 
6 
Dmhmacllarya, of 13ral1rnachar~a ; continence. 
fisarztrq Pratir . tl&y&m, 
. 
in the confirmation. 4 ViryS, vigour. m: LLbllak, gaining ; obtaining. 
I, 
' 
58. Continence being confirmed, vigour is obtained. 
By whose attainment, the Yogi perfects his attainments u~d~eckecl, 
and llaving ntt ained the power becomes capaljle of imparting knowledge 
to learners.- 89. 
V~~CHASPATI'S 
GLOSS. 
Vigour is power by attainhg which, being unchecked, i.e., without giving way to 
obstacles, the Yogi perfects, that is, lays by the store of Ai$rnii, &c. 
Having attained the power :--When 
he is possessed of the eight attainments known 
as T&ra, &C., and having other names as Uha, &c. 
Learners are the disciples, of the Yogi. Knowledge lueans the Yoga which is an 
accessory of the yoga. He becomes capable of teaching Yoga.--38. 
Aparigraha, of non-covetousness. ?W Sthairge, in the confirmation. 
m 
Janma-kathamtb, of the how of births. ditrur: Sambodhah, the knowledge. 
39. Non-covetousness being confirmed, the knowledge 
of-the-how of births.- 90. 
V Y ~ S A .  
N on-covet ousness being con firinetl, the knowledge of the how-of- 
hirths comes to hiin. 
Who was I ? 
How was L ? Wl~hat is this ? 
How 
is this? What shall we be? Or, How sllnll we be? In this shape 
8 

comes to him the desire of knowing the nature of his own existence in the 
pastj the present and the future. 
I 
These are attainment& clue to the confirmation of the restraints. 
We shall now speak of those that are caused by observances.-00. 
Non-~ovetousness being confirmed, the knowledge of the ' 
how-of-bi rths. ' Birth 
means coming into relationsllip with the physical body and the powers of sensation, &C., 
tlogether. The how-of-birth means its modality. Its knowledge means its direct conscious- 
ness. It means the perfect knowledge of the past, the present and of all that is beyond 
ken, together with their modes. 
Questions about the past : --' Who was I 3 Questions about the different modes of 
thb birth and preservation of the same :-g 
HOW wag I ? ' Wishes t o  know the nature of 
the present birth :-'What 
is this ?' Is the physical body the mere collection of the 
physical elements or something different therefrom ? Here too the words ' How is this P' 
are to be understood. 
In some books they actually appear. 
Questions about the future :-g 
What shall we be ?' 
Here too the how ~nust be under- 
stood. Thus comes to him the desire to know of his own existence, Le., the coaing into 
relationship with the body, Lc., in the past, the present and the fatare. From the desire 
comes tliekuowledge, the rule being that one does whatever he desires.-39. 
SGtra 40. 
dayhiit, by cleanliness. ; w r ~  
Sva-ahga, to one's own body. m 
Jugup&, 
disinclination. *: Paraib, with others. &i: 
Asamsargrrl>, cessation of contact. 
40. By cleanliness, disinclination to-one's-body, and 
cessation-of-contdct with-others. --91. 
One begins to clean, himself, beino 
.a disgusted with the dirt of his 
body. 
Then he sees the defecbs of the body. ' He loses his attachment 
to the body, and becomes restrained in himself. 
Furthermore, he ceases 
to come into contact with others. IIe sees the nature of the bodg.. He 
wishes to give np his own body, seeing that it is never pure, even though 
it is being constantly washed by water, &c. How should he come into 
contact with the body of others which are all the more impure ?-91. 
-. 
VACHASPATI~S GLOSS. 
This shows the external cleanliness to be the indicator of attainments.-40. 
SGtra 41. 

f 
1, 
CH. II.' 
ON TIiE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 92, 93. 
167 
- p p -  
-- 
I 
- 
m Sattva, of the essence. g Buddhau, on the purification. h 
Sau- 
manasys, high-mindedness. 
Ekhgrya, one-pointedness. 
Indriya, of the 
senses. W Jaya, control. m Atmil, of the self. q~ D~ariana, the knowledge. 
m Yogyatva, fitnesa for all these. V Cha, and. 
41. 
And upon-the-essence becoming-pure, come high- 
mindedness, one-pointedness, control of the senses and 
fitness for the knowledge of the self.--92. 
Further, high-mindedness, control of the senses and fitness for self- 
knowledge come upon the essence becoming pure. 
By cleanliness comes 
the purity of the essence. 
Thence high-mindetlness, thence one-pointed- 
new, thence control of the senses and thence fitness for -self-lcnowledge, 
of the essence of the mind. This it is that comes to the Yogi by cleanli- 
nesti being confirmed .-g;?. 
V~CHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Now he describes the attainments i~idicated by intcrnal cleanliness :-' Further, &C.' 
B; 
washing off the impurities of the mind the essence of the mind shows itself in ite 
purity. By t h e  re~noral of dirt comes high-mincledness which is an index of purity. That 
which is puro hecomcs one-pointed. The mind having been t h u s  con trolled, the senses 
too are controlled, being dependent a s  they are upon the mind. Thence the essence 
of the mind becomes fit for self-knowledge.-41. 
Santo&d, by contentment. Tay: Anuttamah, excellentl, extreme. F 
Sukha, of happiness. m: LLbhah, acquisition. 
42. 
By contentment the acquisition' of extreme happi- 
ness.-93. 
Mtmrqw~: U-: 
I ~ P R  * ~ i  
I m %W@ 
qw @d m- 
wq I 
q1fii"a: - 
5 ~ ~ f t r P a  
1, %? 1, 
VYASA. 
I 
And so it has been said :- Whatever of pleasure is there in . tlle 
world of desires, and whatever of larger happiness is there in the world 
of heaven, they do not come to the sixteenth part of the joy due to the 
suppression of desires.'- 93. 
Extreme means that than which there is nothing higher in existence. A s  was said 
by YayLti to Puru when he was begging his ~ o u t h  
from him :-' The wise man who gives- 
- 

up desire so difficult to give up by the ignorant and never becoming old with age is full d 
bliss.' Shows this by whatever is there, &C.'- 
42 
SGtra 43. 
m K&ya, of the physical body. 6- Indriya, of the senses. MS: Siddhih, 
the attainment. 
Aiuddhi, of impurity. 
Ky.yOts, omiug to the removal. 
m: Tapasal~, through porifwa tory actions. 
43. By-purificatory-ac tions, the removal of i~npuri 
tly 
Purificatory actions, as they are being done, destroy the dirt of the 
veil of impurit'y. . By the destruction of the dirt of this veil, come the 
atkinmea tls of the physical body. 
. 
Agiing and others. 
So :rlso the 
attainments of the senses,' clnir audie~lce and though t-readi ng from a 
distance, &ca-94. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Hentions the indications of the attainment of the Purificatory action. By Puri Aca- 
tory ?&ion, 
&C. The veil which is described as impurity consists of vice, &c, due to 
inertia. ApitnL and others, such as Mahim6, Laghilnii and PrAptlil It is all easy.L43. 
vmmg Sv&dh~&~&t, 
by s t ~ d y .  qe 
Ista-devatb, 
. . 
with the desired deity. 
m: Bnmprayogab,' communion. 
44. By-study comes co~nmunion with the desired 
dei ty.-95. 
is given to study, aud they do take part in his work.-%. 
. 
\ 
V~CBASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Mentions the attainments indicated by the perfection of study :-' By study communi- 
on with the desired deity.' 
This is easy.-44. 
Siitra 45. 
m& Sarnldhi, of trance. e: 
Siddhih, the att\aiment. tw-qrm, fivara- 
prapidh&n&t, by making fsvara the motive of all actions. 

ments. 
We shall now describe tile posture, &c. Of these, posture is 
steadily easy. Thus, for example, tlie Padm bsana, the Virilsana, the Bhad- 
r h n a ,  the Svastika, tlie Danc!2snua, the Sopadmya, the Paryaidrs, the 
I<raulichnisildana, tlie Ilastinig&dana,' the Ustrani@dana, the Samasam- 
sthGna, the S thirasulrha, the PathBsukha and such others. -97. 
23 
C .  
II. 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 96, 97. 
169 
vytisn. 
The f a d  t,y of trance (sanlbdlii) becomes perfect in him who 'dedi- 
cates all his powers to fdvara. By this he knows all that lie desires to 
know, just as it is in' reality, in anotlm place, in another body or at 
another time. 
Then his intellect knows everything as it is.-9G. 
'V~CHASPATI'S GLOSS, 
The attainment of trance by making iivara the motive of all actions.' 
It should not 
be said that inasmuch ss the Cognitive trancc is attained by making- bars the motive 
of all actions, the remaining seven accessories nro useless. These accessories are 
useful in the attainment of that mental mood which devotes all actiap to the purposes 
of idvara, by known and unknovzn subsidiary methods. They are also useful in the 
attainment of the Cognitive trance, by a separate combination of accessories. Thus the 
same curds serve the purpose of a man and arc useful for the purposes of a sacrifice. 
In this case the accessories of concent;ration, meditation and trance would not be 
t h e  interna41 accessorie8 of the Cognitive trance. The Cognitive trance would thus 
become a cause 'equal in degree with them. Its dircctness (internnlity! is perceived by 
, 
the other accessories not being directly turned towards it. The observance of making 
iu'vsra the motive of all action has iivarr only for its direct object. Its direct object 
is not the ollject of Cognitive trance. Therefore this is an external, indirect means. 
Thus all is plain. 
- 
The word PrajanPti = ' knows,' shows the radical meaning of praj fig, intellect.--45. 
Sthira, steady. m, 
U 
Sukham, easy. m, Asanam, posture. 
46. Po'sture is steadilv -easv.-97. 
VYASA. 
The restraints and observances have been described with attain- 

V~~CHASPATI'S 
GLOSS. 
Ictrod~~ces 
the ilext aphorism :--' The restraints and olxervances, &C.' 
' Of these, 
posture is steadily easy.' ' Steadiness means absence of motion. The same must be easy. 
It must not cause trouble. Such should be the postme. This is the meaning of the 
aphorism. Posture is the way in which one sits. He mentions different postures :-As 
for example :-The 
Padmiisana is well-known. The Virdsana is that in which a sitting 
man has one foot iu contact with the ground, and places the other over the partially 
inclhed other knee. 
The Bhadrdsana is that in which the sitting man places the soles of both feet joined 
together below the testicles, and places both hands with the fingers interlaced over that 
region. 
The Svastika is that in which the left foot is placed, a little downward inclined 
between the right thigh and shank, and tjhe right foot is placed in a similar'position 
between the lefb thigh and shank. 
The Dand5sana is practised by sitting with thighs, shanks and feet stretched straight 
along the ground with the ankles joined together, but the toes kept apart. 
The Paryailka is that in which the knees are extended and the arms are used to lie 
upon. 
The Sopsu'raya is that in which the tiger's skin OP the deer skin or some cloth is 
used to sit upon. 
The KrauficllanigPdana and others of the same class are to be imitated from the 
sitting postures of the Kraulicha, the elephant, the camel. 
, 
The Samasamsth&na is that in which the feet are so placed that the heels and fore- 
parts of both arc joined together with the feet a little bent. 
The Sthirasukha is whatever posture may secure steadiness and ease. This is 
approved by tqe writer of the aphorisms. It is also described as Yathasukha. This 
hieans any position that may secure ease.-46. 
Sdtra 47. 
sma&cgn;aasmri'~rq 
% 
ll W1 
W Prayatna, of effort. 8 6 ~  
iaithilp, by slackening. 
Ananta, as in 
the infinite. W, 
S~mbpattibhybm, and by thought transformation. 
47. By-slackening of effort and by thought-trans- 
formation as infinite.-98. 
VYASA. 
The sentence4 is completed by adding the word, ' is secured.' Pos- 
ture becomes perfect when effort to that end ceases, so that there may be 
no more movement of the body. 
Or, when the mind is transformed into 
the infinite, that is, makes the idea of infinity its own, it brings about the 
perfection of posture. -98. 
VACH ASPATIS GLOSS. 
Having described the nature of posture, he describes the means thereof :--'By 
slackening of effort and by thought-transforming as infinite.' 
The effort which is directed 
towards the accomplishment of a certain posture helps to keep the body in a particular 

H .  11. 
ON TBE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 98, 99, 100. 
171 
I 
position. It is not the cause of the posture which as an accessory of Yoga Is meant to be 
- 
taught here. If that mere its cause, the teaching would be useless, inasmuch as in 
S 
that case the posture would be achieved by its own operation. Therefore this natural 
effort of the body does not'bring about the posture that is meant to be taught. It is in 
fact its antagonistic. Further this natural effort beiog the antecedent of the posture 
that may at any time be desired, 
away with the very object of posture. Therefore, he 
who pra~t~ises 
posture as an observance taught here, should ernploy a& effort which consists 
in suppressing the natural efforts of the body. Otherwise the posture taught here will 
not be accomplished. It is for this reason that the slackening of the natural efforts of 
the body is said to be tho means of accomplishing posture. 
Or, the mind transformed into the idea of t h e  infinite, the Great Serpent, who up- 
holds the sphere of the carth by means of his very steady thousand heads, brings about 
at eadiness .-47, 
SQtra 48. 
m: Tatab, then. 
Dvamdva, from the pairs of opposite. *: 
Anabhi- 
\ 
4 
gh&tab, cessation of disturbance. 
48. 
Thence cessation-of-disturbance f rom-the-pairs- 
of-opposites.-99. 
When posture has been mastered he is not disturbed by the pairs 
of opposites such as heat and cold.-99. 
VBCHABPATI~S 
GLOSS. 
Mentions the indications of the achieveaent of posture. 
'' Thence the cessation of disturbance from the pairs of opposites." 
The Commentary has been explained by what has already been said.-48. 
a. 
Tasmin, that (the posture). tm Rati, being. W ~ v i ~ s a ,  
of the inspiratory 
breath. *: 
Pra$v&sayob, of the expiratory breath. 6 Cati, of the movementfi. 
m: Vichchhedab, stop page. mum: Pr&&y&rnab, regulation of breath. 
. 
49. 
Regulation-of-breath (Priinky h a )  is the stoppage 
of the inspiratory and expiratory movements (of breath) 
which follows, when that has-been-secured.--100. 
&q&& 
S q W q d m :  
marmrrr: I ~~ 
WFllPT 
m: 
I h, 
~
:
U
R
-
~
 
I dd%fh%t 
mmm 
sl'mv?m:. II m I1 
VYASA. 
When posture has been achieved the cessation of the movements 
of both inspiration, the drinking in of external air, and expiratisn, the 

PA*TANJALI'S 
YOGA. 
throwiug out of the internal air, is the reguli~tiol~ 
of breat,h (PrilqAyAma). 
-100. 
Y ~ C H A  
SPB?'I'S GLOSS. 
Posture also has beer1 described in t h e  V i s p  P n r i ~ a  :--' Having thus practised the 
BhadrSsana, &C., nucl being full of their qualities, c
.
 After posture describes the 
PrB ~ l y i r n a ,  
a t  tllc same time showing that posturemust precede i t  :-' Prl!~iyPrna is the 
cessation of the ins1,"lratory and expiratory movc:uents of breath which follows whcil 
that has been secured.' The cessation of Ihe movements of expiration and inspiration 
exists ia the Rechakn, Kurnbhnks and l'arak * branchos of the regulation of breath. This, 
therefore, is a description of the ordinary 13rii!~6>hrna. This mcans that where in the 
Puraks the external air having h e n  expelled is retained inside, the Cessation of the 
inovenlents of iuspiration and cspiratiou takes place. Similarly, where in the Recbaka, 
the exterilal air having been exyelled is rostr::ined outside, thc cessntioll of the ~uovements 
of i~~spiration 
and expiratio11 takes place. Similarly, in the Kumbhaka too. This is ~ v h a t  
the commentary says : --' When po sture has been, &c*'--49. 
m Hbhyn, external. m
m
 
hbhynntara, iuternnl. m Stambha, total res- 
traint. &: Vrittih, inmifestation. $a D&, 
place. 
X$ln, time. 
Sankl~yb, 
number, by these three. sRge: Paridristah, 
. . 
regulated. 64 Dirghn, long. FWI: 
a 
Silk$- 
mab, and subtle. 
50. Rlanifestatioi~ as external, internal and total res- 
C 
traint is regulated by place, time and number ; ancl thus it 
becomes long-induration ancl subtle.--101. 
e * 
U 3 I m l ~ a T ~ 8 W @ ~ $ n ~ 3 ~ 3 ~ k :  
tq 
*et 
;Z19KQR: I Wt 
~~~~ m: 
U =m: 
I 93 
wmr: U aTwqT: l qm- 
~anr*&~msrra: wgm9.mm I wk aii mmwB 'qFj&g: u+m- 
m- 
awr a%&wmm .;Pa 
I 56irs4tt ?$tit* &g 
~mqs 
I 8 
~it-~.n: 
~an&r7araw&~r~;1fiva~ 
~ m 6 :  I mq&: 
W 
Q&EV -a&: 
masrm8: j~w 
qmerzf~q@a~%mqf$tif ~iim 
6 eq: 
I PFi q@S m vi 
U w w i m b e r  
And that manifests as external, internal and total restraints, is regu- 
lated by time, place and number ; is of long duration and subtle. The 
cessation of the inotion of breath wl~icli precedes expiration is external. 
The cessation of the motion of breath wllich precedes inspiration is inter- 
nal. The third manifests total restraint ~dlere cessation of both these 
motions takes place by n single effort. 
A s  water thrown on a heated 
stone shrivels np from all sides, so do both cease sitn~dtaneously. All these 
three are regulated by place. 
So nlucli of space is occupied by it. Also 

ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 101, 102. 
I 
are they regulated by time. The meaning is that they are measured by 
ascertaining the seconds of their duration. They are also regulated by 
number. The first cessation is for so many, the second for so many, and 
similarly the third. Similarly it is thus mild, thus middling and thus 
intense. Thus it is regulated by number. 
This verily thus practised 
becomes long induration and subtle.--101. 
V~CHASPATI~S 
GLOSS. 
He introduces the apliorism by describing the three doscriptions of PrBp %ylma :-- 
' And t h a t  manifests as external, internal and total restraint ; is regulated by time, place 
and number ; is of long duration and subtle.' 
The word Vritti ' manifestation' is related 
to all t110 three. He describes t h e  Reehaka :--' 
That which precedes expiration.' 
Des- 
cribes t h e  Purahs :-' That which precedes inspiration.' Describes the Eumbhaka :- 
Tlle third, &C.' 
Renders the same p!ainer :-' Where the cessation of both inspiration 
and expiration takes piace simultaneously by a single effort of restraint, not that i t  stands 
l 
in need of restraining effort which is the culmination of the cffort of inspiration, nor that 
i t  stands in need of the restraining effort which culminates in the effort of expiration. 
On the other hand, as water thrown on a heated stoilc shrivels upon all sides as i t  is be- 
i n g  dried up, so also the air running in or out ceases its action by a strong effort of 
restraint, and stays in the body reduced to a state of greater than ordinary tenuity. It 
does not fill in and is not, thcrefore, Puralia. Nor does i t  go out and is n d ,  therefore, 
Rechaka. 
In the external the limit of space is ineasured in a place free from wind by the effect 
l 
upon straw or a pierc cf cotton wool, by a yard or foot-rule cr b~ the hand. 
Similarly, 
in the iutcrnal i t  is measured by the sensation of touch at the isden of feet or at the 
forehead, slight like the touch of an ant. 
A g second ' (ksaua) 
. 
is the fourth part of the period 3f time taken by the act of shut- 
t i i ~ g  
the eyes. It is measured by ascertaining the seconds of duration. 
A matr& ' (measure) is the time which is taken upt by thrice turning up one's hand 
over one's knee and then snapping the fingers once. 
Measured by thirty-six such rnjtrik i s  the first attempt (vdghhta) which is mild. 
I Twice that is the second, vhich is middling. 
Thrice that is the third which is intense, 
This is tohe PriinPyBma as measured by number. It is described :-Thus is it measured by 
number, &c. 
The time taken by the inspiration and expiration of a healthy man is tl;e same as 
that which is measured by snapping the fingers, as described, after turning tho hand 
thrice over the knee. 
The first attempt when carried to its completion is said to be conquered or mastered. 
The time is intended to be described by so many inspirations aud expirations. 
They are 
practically the same. 
This PriniigBrna becomes of long duration when i t  takes up greater space and time, 
Eehg daily practised and being increased in succession of a fortnight, a day, &c. It ie 
subtle, becanse it is known by verj subtle trance (samldhi) not because it becomes weak. 
-60. 
SGtra 5 1 .  
m Rillya, the external. 
hbhyantara, the internal. fdrw Vipya, region, 
spheres. 
Akgepi, paseing over, going beyond. M: Chaturthab, the fourth. 

51. The fourth is that which follows when the spheres 
The sphere of the external, having been mastered by the measure- 
m e n t ~  of time, space and number, is left bellincl. Similarly is the 
sphere of the internal thus measured, left behind. In the case of both, 
it becomes long and subtle. The cessation of the mol-ements of both, 
in sequence of the attainment of that state, by gradual mastery over the 
different states, is the fourth. In the third the sphere is not considered ; 
the cessation of motion takes place with one single effort, and is then 
measured by space, time and number ; and thus becomes long and subtle. 
In the fourth, hoivever, the spheres of inspiration and expiration are 
ascertained, the different states are mastered by and by, and it follows 
the perfection of both. Thus comes about thc cessation of the movements 
of both. This is the fourth Prbnbydma and is thus distinguished.-102.- 
V~CHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Thus three descriptions of Prlr$iybma have been described. Now he describes the 
fourth :-' The fourth is that, &C.' 
Explaills :-g 
The sphere of the external, &C.' 
' Left behind ':--dethroned 
from its position, which has been mastered by practice. 
That also is protracted and subf-Je. 
' In sequence of' :-The 
c z k r n d  and internal PdnBylmns preceded by a calculation 
of time, space and number. And this fourth oilc is not brought about all at once, by a 
single effort like the third one. 
On the other hand it reaches different states of perfection, as it is being practised; 
and as one state has been mastered it goes on to Lhc Ligher stage in succession, aild it is 
thus acquired. This is said: -'By gradual mastery over the different states.' 
The question is that the cessation of the motiou of both the Prii!4y5mas takes place 
in the third Prlinbyama also, which is described as the total restraint ; what then is the 
distinction b~tmeen the third and the fourth. For this reason he says :-' In the third, &C.' 
The third is brought about by a single effort aud is not preceded by the thought of 
measurements. The fourth, however, is preceded by t h e  knowledge of the measurements, 
alld is brought about by much effort: This is the difference. The meaning is that the 
ephereg of the Puraka and the Recliaka are not considered, but this is measured by time, 
space aud number.-51. 
Sdtra 52. 
in: Tatab, then. ad KsPyate, is destroyed. m& PrakAPa, of light. 
hmmarn, the cover. 

C
.
 I I .  
- 
ON THE PRACTICE OF YOGA 133, 104. 
175 
52. Thence the corer of light is destroyed.-103. 
VPAWA. 
The karma of the Yogl whicll colTers u p  the cliscriminative know- 
ledge is destroyed as he practises the PrbnrlyiLrna. This is what they 
6 
say :- 
By the magic panorama of desire, the Essence, which is luminous 
by nature, is covered up, and the same is directed towards rice.' 
This 
karma of t,lle Yogl w l ~  
ich cot-em up the light and bhds him to repeated 
births, becomes weak by the practice of Prii$y&nia ererr moment, and 
is then rlestroged. And so it has been said : -' Tilere is no 
,. - purificatory 
action higher than Pxiinriviima 
. C 
; purity is secured by that, through the 
destruction of impurity ; and the light of knowledge shines.--103. 
V ~ H A S P A T I ' S  GLOSS. 
, 
He describes the object of PrP nByAms :--' Thence the cover of light is destroyed.' 
The cover is that which covers up the light of Mental Essence. It means the afRictions and 
sin. He explains :--' The karma of the Yogi ......as he practices I'ri?;iyirna.' 
Knowledge 
is that by which anything is known. It is the light of the Mental Essence. 
JXscrimina- 
tivc knowledge is the lrnowledgc of the distinction (between the Objective Essence and 
consciousness). That which covers up discriminative knowledge ' is t h e  karma which 
covers up.' Karma means the vice which is brought about by action SO called, and the 
~lffietions caused thereby. He says that the Agarnis agree in this matter :-' This is what 
they say.' 
Desi-re is spoken of as the Great Forgetfulness. By the mention of desire is 
to bo understood Nescience also which is found inseparal~ly joined to it. 
Vice is that which should not be clone. 
The question arises that if Pr.i!lQB ma aloce does away with vice what is the use 
of pnrificatory action ? (Tapas). For this reason he says :--'' Becomes weak " and not 
altogether destroyed by it. Therefore, pu~ificatory action is necessary for its destruc- 
tion. In his too the &amis agrce :-'And 
so it has been said.' 
3Iam also says :-C 
Let the defects be burnt u p  by PrB!~Py$mn.' 
The Visrrp 
. . ' Purl !a speaks of the Pri$ijrBrna as an accessory of Yoga :-' He who 
masters the air known as PrQm by practice, is said to have secured PrBnByiIma.' It is 
either seeded or seedless. When the powers known as Prii9a and ApQa are mastered me 
by the other, it is two-fold. 
The third is that when both are checked.-5%. 
mu 
D11brapPsu, for concentration. 
Chs, and. %m 'YogyatEt, the fitnm. 
m: Manasab, of the mind. 
53. And the fitness of the mind for concentration.-104. 

arp ~ i q p j  
' e ~ a ~ t  
$1 ss 'pus sloalqo n a q l  yqr~ govluo:, olur auloe ~ o u  
op 
sasrras a y  r[o!rp 6q l'l?tp 61 CIHI[I:&I~ 
V 
W 
p 
d n.n?q~S$wd 
V 
s~ $crp &ON 
vsy AA 
11 F h  M :m 
W- 
@*W 
~
~
~
4
!
~
~

CB. 11. 
ON TEIE PRACTICE OF YOGA, 105, .106. 
I77 
not, on account of the absence of that contact, incline towarcls their objects. This is the 
i:nitation of the mind by the senses. Inasmuch however, as the senses do not imitate. 
the millcl in the fact of the taking in of the realities of the ol~jects, because their field of 
operatioa is the external worlcl alone, it is 
d that they, as it were, imitate the mind. 
By using the locative case i t  is shown that the ordinary quality of non-contact with 
thcir objects is t h e  operative cause of the senses imitating the mind. ' In the absence of 
contact with their, QC.' Esplains the imitation :-' The senses are restrained like the 
mind, &C.' 
The similarity is that the cause of the restraint of both is and the restraint 
of both is due t,o,'the same effortl. Illustrates the same 
:-l 
Just as the bees &C.' Applies 
the illustratiou to the object to be illustrated :--'So, 
&C.' 
In this connection also says the Viy.1~ PurQa : 
-g 
The Yogi who is devoted to t b  
practice of PrrtyLhBra sllould restrain the senses which are attwhed to the objects of 
sound, &c:, and make them imitate t h e  mind.' 
Its object is shown even there. " Those of undisturbecl mitlcl h a w  thereby tbe 
highest possible control of the senses. If the senses are uncontrollecl, the Yogi canuot 
achieve Yoga."-54. 
Satra 55. 
UR Tatab, thence. 
Paramb, the highest. mm ValyatO, control. 6fjr~ 
IndriyAglrn, of the senses. 
4- 
1 
Some say that the conquest of the senses is their non-attachment to 
sound, etc. Attachment is a defect which draws them away from the 
good. 
Others say that inasmuch as the enjoyment of unprohibited objects 
is proper, it should be said that contact with souud, &C., subject to one's 
wishes, is the conquest of the senses. Others again say that the conquest 
l 
of the seilses is the obtaining of knowledge of sound, &C., without their 
causing pleasure and pain, in the absence of a t t a t h e n t  and aversion. 
Jaugifavga says that it is only the want of action of the Eenses, on 
account of the one-pointedness of the mind. For this reasoil it is then 
that this control is the very highest, the restraint, that is to say, of the 
riunses along witb the restraint of the mind ; and also for the reason that 
* 
m 
\ 

l78 
P ~ T A N J A L I ' S  YOGA. 
the Yogts, being thus restrained, do not stand in need of employing 
other means, like those employed in the conquest of o t h r  organs.-106. 
V~CHASPATI~S 
G LOSS. 
' Thence the senses come under the highest control.' 
Aro there any controls of the 
senses which may be said not to be the highest, so that it is said here that the highest 
control is secured ? Shows them : --' 
Some say that the conquest, &C.' Explains this :- 
/ Attachment is desire. The word in the origilial is VpBsaua, which is described as 
meaning that which removes away from the good. The absence of this attachment which 
draws one away from the good, is the control. Describes another control :-The 
enjoy- 
ment of such sound, &C., as is not forbidden by iruti, &C., and the avoidance of those 
that are forbidden, is proper, that is, in accordance with propriety. 
He describes another control :-' Contact with sound, &C.' 
The contact of the 
senses with sound, &C., depends llpon one's wishes. Man is free to enjoy whatever 
he like@. He is not dependent upon the enjoyment. 
He mentions another control also :-' The knowledge of sound, BC., without pleasure 
and pain, &G! 
. 
He mentions the control which is preferred by t h e  author of the aphorism, and 
with which a great Rigi is in accord: 
Jaigisavya says that it is the non-inclination of the 
senses towards their objects, t h e  sounds, !h., along with the mind which has become 
one-pointed., Now he says that this id the highest control :--' Bor this reason is it then, 
&C.' 
The word then' (TU in the original) differentiates t h i s  control from other controla. 
The other controls do not remove the possibility of contact with the poison of afflictions, 
because they are of the nature of the conjunction between the serpent and the poison. 
Even the greatest professor of the science of poisons who has controlled a serpenq 
sleeps not with the serpent in his arms, without fear. This control, however, which js 
free from contact with all poisons, leaves no fear, and is, therefore, called the Highest. 
Like the control of the other organs' :-h the state of 
the YatHtma Yogi, when 
--one 
sense has been controlled, the Yogi stallds in need of further effort for controlling 
the remaining senses. Not So is there need of other effort to control the external 
senses, when the mind is restrained. 'This is the meaning.-&. 
Five o1,jects have been treated in this chapter r 
The Kriyl Yoga, t h e  AfBictions, 
Fruitage of actions, the consequent Pain, and the four branches of the science of sorrow. 
Here fiiiishes the Gloss of V k h s p a t ~ i  on the second Chapter of the Commentary of 
vy&sa on Yitanjali's Yoga Philosophy. 
The chapter describing ' The means of Yoga.' 

CHAPTER TIIIRD. 
e: 
@W), D~eiah-bandhah, fixity in one place. 
Steadfastness. h 
Chittaspa, of the mind. wwr Dhbra~b, concentration. 
1. Concentration is the steadfa~t~ness 
of the mind.-107. 
The five external nleans of attainment have beeu described. 
Con- 
,-- 
cell tration (Uhilraqb) is flow cliscussed. ' Concentration is tlta steadfast., 
* 
ness of the mind.' 
Concentration means the mind becoming fast in such 
places ss the sphere of the navel, the lotus of the heart, the light in the 
bi-ain, the fore-part of the hose, the fore-part of the tongue, and such like 
parts of the body ; or by' means of the modifications only in any other 
external object only.- 107. 
Trance (Sam5dhi) and the?heans of its attainment have been descrilwd i~ the first 
and second chapters. In the third chapter arc to be described the attainments whieii 
follow in their wake and which are tLe means of generating faith. The attainments are 
aehieved by Baruyamci. 
Girmpnuc consists of concentration, meditation and trance to- 
gether. As means for the achievement of attainments, these three accessories are more 
intimate than the five external ones, and thus being irlternal, they are described hers, 
in order that they may be specifically mastered. Among these too, concentration. 
meditatiou and trance are related to one another ss cause and cEecf consecutively, and 
their order of causation is fixed. The order is respected here in the enumeration. 
'Pherefcre co~lcentration is described first. 
Thus the Bhapyakih says :--l 
The five 
external means, etc.' ' Cbncentration is the steaclfastness of the mind.' He enumerates 
the places for concenhktion in the body :--' The sphere of the navel, e t d  
Such like 
parts of the body' indicate the palate, &C. 
He describes the external objects :--' Or any 
other external object.' It is not possible for the mind to come into relationship with 
bhe exter~ial objects bodily ; liewe i's it said : 
L By means of the modifications only.' 
Oo this subject also says the PurOpa :-- 
U Having mastered the breath by means of controlliog the processes 
@ 
of' breathing, 
and having likewise subjected the senses to the mind by the practice of making their 
activity dependent npoa t'he process of thought, he should let his mind rest upon some 
@ 
auspicious object." The external auspicious objeati are the Golden Postus (Hire~ya- 
garbha), Indra and PrajBpati, etc. 
, 

Further the following is said there :-- 
U The personified appearance of the Lord leaves no room for the desire to possess 
any other object of conocntration. The fact of t h e  mind being held fast there is what 
is called concentration. And, 0 king, hear what that personified appearance of the Lord 
is that should be meditated upon ; therecm be no concentratiou without something 
upon which the mind may rest. The face is cheerful and pleasing to the mind, the eyoe 
are full of freshness and depth like lotus-loaves, the cheeks are beautiful, the forehead 
is bright and high, the ears are symmetrical sod well-adorned by drops, the neck is 
long like the shell of a conch ; the auspicious sign of fortune, the drivatsa, maris his 
chest ; mith a deep navel and deep furrows appearing in the abdomen ; with eight or 
four arms hanging from his body ; sitting with thighs and shanks. evenly placed, and 
feet placed in the form of a Svagtikn. Such is the appearance of T'isnn clad in clean 
yellow garb, adorned with beautif a1 head-dress, armlet, bracelet, etc. ; carrying his bow, 
the $&rhga, his discus, his club, his -sword, his conch-shell and his rosary of Rudrskss. 
He has become Brahola. With mind merged in Him, let the Yogi devote himself to 
meditating upon Him, Let him apply his mind to hiin 
SO long as his concentration 
becomes well established. Practising this concentration or doing some other work in 
accordance mith his own wishes, so long as t h e  mind learns not to get away from the 
object of concentration, the Yogi should in that state consider his concentration 
achieved. -1. 
Sfitra 2. 
m Tatra, there. mw Pratyaya, of the mental effort. 
Ekat$nat$, conti- 
. 
nuation. v 
Dhybnam, rnedi tation. 
2. The continuation there of the mental-effort (to 
understand) is meditation (dhv8na).-108. 
V 
Meditation is the contiuuance, i.e., the unchanging flow, of the 
mental effort to understand the object 
- 
of meditation, nntouched by any 
other effort of the understanding.-108. 
V~~HASPATI'S 
GLOSS. 
The author describes the meditation which is brought about by concantration :- 
'Continuance of the mental effort to understand it is meditation.' 
~ontinuanco of the 
mental effort means one-pointedness. Thg Commentary is easy. Here too clays the 
Pur&qa : Meditation is the continualwe of one-pointedness with reference to the 
etfort ~f understanding directed to any object, there being absence of desire to under- 
stand anything else a t  the time. This ia brought about, 0 Kiog, by the foregoing 
wq 
N Tad, the same. W Eva, the same. Prf Artha, object, the light of the object. 
M&m, alone. fir*)srl NirbhBsam, .shining with. m Svadpa, itself. m ifin yam, 
devoid of. a ha, ae it were. e: 
Sarniidhib, trance, contemplation. 

CH. 111. 
ON ATTAIPMENTS, 109, 1.10. 
181 
I 
3. The same when shining with the light of the 
object done, and devoid, as-it-were, of itJself, is trance (or 
contemplation, Samiidhi).-100. 
em6mRwfu ~ w s q q R m  mlif: I 
r*mi%qM 
When on account of the object of contemplation taking entire 
possession of the mind, contelnplntion sltows forth only the light of the 
form of the conte~nplntetl object, and is devoid, as it were, of its nature 
of self-cogni tion, then it is called trance (or conten~plat~ion). 
-1 09. 
V~CZIASPATI'S G LOSS. 
The author clesc,ril~es trance which is brought a h u  t 11y moditatfon :- 
U The same when it shines by the light of the object alone, and is devoid, as it 
*- 
wore of itself, is trance.'' 
The Blriisyaklra explains :-' When on account of contempla- 
tion, etc.' ; Shows forth only the form of the ol~ject of contc~nylation : ' Devoid, etc.' 
Inasmuch ss the question arises that if it is devoid of the nature of self-cognition, how 
call i t  illuminate the object, he adds : -' AS i t  uTerc.' He mentions its cause :-l 
On 
account of t h e  object of contemplation taking entire possession of t h e  mind.' 
The Purins has on this too : " Trance is that in n7hich the mind takes in the nature 
of the object of thought free from ' Fancy' (kalpanii). It is brought about by ineditation." 
Fancy (1;alpm:i) consists in the perception of the a c t  m d  the object of meditation as 
distinct froin cacll other. The Trance-Cognition is free from this fancy. 
Having clescribed t h e  eight accessories of Yoga to Khmdikya, Kuiidhvaja thus 
summarized : -' The knorver of the field is t h e  employer of the means. 
The means is 
knowledge, that is not intelligent. Having achieved the work of salvation, it has 
nothing of its duty left to do, aud turns back.'-3. 
S~ltra 
4. 
r l  1 hese three toge tller, concentration, meditation and trance are 
Samyama. 
The practice of all the three accessories with reference to one 
object of thought is Samyama. This word Bamyama is a technical term 
of the science meant to denote the three.-110. 
Inasmuch as the mention of concentration, meditation and trance, all three, each by 
its own separate name at every place, would be very lengthy, this aphorism is introduced 

with the. object of laying down a technical term tor the sake of brevity :--' The three 
together are Samyama.' 
The BhlnyakPra esplains :--' With reference to one object, 
etc.' He removes the possible doubt that the word has the radical meatling of these 
three :--a The word is a tecbuical term, etc." 
(The word Tantra in the original means. 
the science of Yoga. Hence ' TOntrika' means a technical term of the science.) The 
province of Smnyrrna is the ' Three changes ' and such other places.--4. 
q Tad, of that. slpn! Jnylitl, by the achievement. m Pm@, of the cognition. 
h: 
LokaF, the visibility. 
a 
5. By achievement thereof comes the visibility of the 
Cognition.--111 . 
By ihe achieve~nent of this ' Sarpyama ' comes the visibility of the 
Trance-Cognition. As Samyaina 
c 
becomes firmer and firmer so does the 
Trance-Cogni tion become more and more lucide-l 3.1 . 
VBCHASPATI~S 
GLOSS. 
The author lnen'ions the fruit of the practice for the achievement of Saluyama :-- 
' By achievement thereof comes the visibility of the Cognition.' Visibility consists in t h e  
maintenance of its flow free from impurity and unimpeded by any other effort of cog- 
nition. The Commentary is easy.-5. 
Sotra 6. 
ntu Tasya, its. ?Fim 
a e BhQrnip, to the planes, regions. ~~~: 
Vinipgab, 
application. 
6. its application is to the planes.--11'2. 
Wllen one plane has been conquered by Samyama, it i s  applied to 
the iiext immediately following. No one who has not conquzred the 
lower plane, can jump over the plane immediately following, and then 
achieve Satpya~na with reference to the plane further ofE. 
And if thie 

- 
\ 
Samyama camot be achieved, how can the visibility of the Cognition 
come ? For him, however, who has ccnquered tlhe higher planes by 
making ldmara the motive of all actions it is not proper to perform 
Samyama with reference to the lower planes, such as thought-reading, 
&c. Why ? Because the object thereof . has alreacly been achieved bv 
V 
means other than this. 
A s  to which is the next immediate plane 
after a certaill plane, it is the practice of Yoga alone that will teach 
this. Hobv ? It has been so said :-' The Yoga is to be known by the 
Yoga ; the Yoga becomes manifest by the Yoga ; whoever is not confused, 
enjoys the Yoga for long by the Yoga.'-112.. 
V~~CHASPATJ~R 
Q LOSS. 
But whereto is this Batpyama to be applied in order to -achieve this fruit ? For this 
reason the author says :--'Its application is to be to the planes.' 
The Commentator 
speciRcs the planes. 'When one plane, &C.' The application is to the unconquered 
plane imrnedi'ately following the plane, that is, t h e  mental state, which has been conquered. 
When the Indistinct Trance Cognition, having tlre gross world for its sphere, has 
been ~chieved by $ar;yama, the application of the Samyarna is to b e  to the yet uncon- 
quered Distinct Trance. When that has heen conquered, the applicatioa is to be t ~ ,  
the 
~ e d i t a t i v e  Transformation. Similar is t h e  applieaticm to the Ultra-meditative. 
For this very reason the PurSnn introduces the trance with reference to the subtle 
objests, after ;he thought-transformation into gross objects has been achieved, and all the 
ayms and orr~anler~ts 
have been put off one after the other :--' Then let the wise man 
meditate upon t h e  form of the Lord as devoid of the conch, the club, t h e  discus and tho 
bow, calm and possessing only the rosary of Ritdrlksa, lYl1en concentmtion has become 
well-established herer~pon, then let the Yogi meditate upom HIM as devoid of the urnz- 
me& of head-&ss, 
armlet, &c. 
Then should h e  devote himself to HIM as possessed of 
t,he limbs alone ; and then should he think of hitnself GS HIS SELF. ' I am HE.' Then 
should he devote himself to t h e  thonght of the ' I am ' done. 
But then why is it that one conquers the higher plane only after having conquered the 
lower one ? 
Why does hc not conquer in the reverse order ? For this reason the BhPsga- 
hfira says :-g 
No one who has not conqnercd the lower plane, &C.' No one who starts 
the Ganges from t.ho dilihrada, reaches the Ganges without first reachink the IMeghav6no. 
For him who has conquered the higher planes by makitlg %warn the motive of all 
jctions, &C." 
Why? Because the object, i.e., the conquest of the higher planes, has been 
achieved by another very proximate means, that is, devotion to God. When an obj& has 
been aptricved, then the employment of a means for its achievement which does not intro- 
duce gomething new in the expected result, overstleps the propriety of the rule of practice. 
well, let that be. But the sub-planes are known by authority. Their crder, howeven, 
is not so known. How is that order to be known ? For this reason he says :-4 
As to 
which is t h e  next, &C.' When the preceding state of Yoga h conquered it becomes the 
cause of the knowledge cf the nature and activity of the next. This is to be understood 
by seeing that the state is intended to be spoken of as being identical with the object of 
which the state is named. 
Sfitra 7. 
my Trayam, the three, k 8 . y  ~ n t a r h ~ a m ,  
forming an internal part more 
than, more intimate. cm: PQrvebbyab, than the preceding. 

7. The three are more-intimate than-the-preceding-1 13. 
The three, concen tl*ntJion, lneclitntion ancl trance are more in tilnate 
means of tl~e Cogrli ti ve 'Ihnce tlmn the preceding five, the restraints, 
&C.-113. 
VACHASPATI~S GLOSS. - 
How is it that Sa~~yarna 
alone is to be employed in all places here aiid there, and not 
the other five, although both are the accessories of Yoga equally ? For this reason the 
author says :--'The three are more intinlate than t h e  peceding o~les.' This t.hree-fold 
means has the object to be achievod as its direct sphero of operation ; it is, therefore, 
called intimate. The restraints, &c ., are uot such ; they are, therefore, called non-intimate. 
This is the meaning.--7. 
S ~ t r a  
8. 
np Tad, that. a6 Api, even. iifw~ 
Bahiradgam, the external part, non- 
inthnate. 68- 
Nribi jasya, to the seedless. 
8. 
Even that is non-intimate to the seedless.-114. 
This intimate txiad of means too becomes an external accessory of 
the seedless trance. 
Wily ? Because it comes iuto existence upon its 
cessation.-1 14. 
VACHASPATI~S GLOSS. 
The triad of means is intimate only to the Cognitive Trance, not to the Ultra-Cogni- 
tive. The Ultra-Cogni t i w  Trance being seedless, there is no ni tuilnrity betmeeii the 
spheres of their operation and also because the seedless trance is born wbcn the triad of 
means has long been unc?er restraint, and the- Cognitive Tranco has reached its highest 
Eulmination, or which is the same thing, when the state of the higher clesirelessiiess 
consisting as it does of the purity of knowledge, is rerched. ' The triad of means, BC.' 
'Even that is non-intimate to the seedless.' 
'Intimacy ' consists in having a common sphere of operation. Then, however, does 
not exist here. There is no immediate sequence here. What it is said that the non- 
intimate means of devotioii to the Lord brings about that state and that therefore there 
is overlapping, it is meant that although the definition uf the intilnate overlaps, inclnd- 
ing as it does the means of devotion to the Lord, it does not possess the characteristic of 
following in immediate sequence and thus differs from the non-intimate. 
For t h i s  
reaeon, in order to show that in the case of the Ultra-C,gnitive the S a g a m a  is rather 
a remote cause, it is said that it comes into existence upon the ceesation theroof.--8. 

on. II!. 
ON ATTAINMENTS, 115. 
185 
VyuttliAna, of outgoing.. 
Nirodhn, of suppressing. + d t ~ :  Says- 
kbrayoh, 
W 
of the potencies. 4%- Abhibhavn, the disappearance. v f i a h  Pradur- 
bhbvau, and the appearance. KIP Nirodha, of the suppression. W, Ksapa, mith 
the moment. fin Chitta, of the mind. M: 
Anvayah, the conjunction. f;ritrs 
Yrodhha, of the suppression, suppressive. *: 
hri&nlab, modification. 
9. The suppressiie modification is the conjunction 
of the mind mith the moment of suppression (nirodha), when 
the outgoing. and suppressive potencies disappear and 
VY &A. 
Change is of the very nature of the functioning of ' the qualities.' 
What sort of change does, therefore, take place at the time of this function- 
ing in the moments of mental suppression ? ' The suppressive modification 
- 
is the conjunction of the mind with the moimnt of suppression, when the 
outgoing and suppressive potencies disappear and appear respectively.' 
l 
The outgoing p~t~encies 
are the characteristics of the mind. It is 
not that they are suppressed by the restraints of tlle acts of cognition, 
being of the nature of the acts of coguition, (as they are not of the nature 
of the acts of cognition). The potencies of suppression too are character- 
istics of the mind. The respective suppression ancl appearance of these 
two, when the characteristics of the outgoing potencies are destroyed and 
the potencies of suppression acquired, is the moment of suppression 
~vhich the mind appears in conjunction with. 
This acquiring of different 
potencies by the one mind every moment is the suppressive change. 
In that state the potencies alone are left in the mind. This has been 
described as the Suppressive Trance. - 
11 5. 
V ~ H A S P A T I ' S  G LOSS. 
The three changes are t o  be utilized in ' By Sarpyama over the three changes, &C.' 
(P. 111, 16). 
24 

It is desirable to explain them. Heuce the question in connection with the seedless 
trance mentioned in the last aphorism : ' what sort of s change, &c*' In the states of out- 
going mental activity and trance (Cognitive), the heaping up of different evidellt ehalsges 
is a matter of direct knowledge. Nu change is, however, perceived in the St~ppressive 
Trance. It is not, however, that it does not exist becaase it is not directly peroeived, 
inasmuoh as the mind is chmgeable on a ~ ~ ~ l l t  
of its being made up of the three qualities, 
and because it is impossible that the 'qualities ' should not change even for + moment. 
This is tile meaning of the questioa The aphorism is t h e  answer to the question :-- 
' The ruppressive change is the con junction of the mind with the moment of suppression, 
when tlre outgoing and suppressive potellcies appear and disappear respectively.' 
I n  relation to the Ultm-Cognitive the con,anitive too is an outgohg. Suppression is that 
by which this is suppressed,--the 
illurnillation of knowledge, the higher desirdessness. 
The disappearance and appearance (~nentioued here) are of these outgoilrg alld suppres- 
sive potencies respectively. This being the case, the disappearance of the outgoing aud 
the appearance of the suogrossivo potency consists in t h e  colljunction of the mind: the 
characterised, wit11 the momellt of suppression. This colljanction in time with the 
*uppression is the co~ljunctioll with both these states. The mind as an individualised pheno- 
menon capable of possessilg charaoteristicrs, does not, either in t h e  Cognitive or the 
Uitra-@ognitive states, ditfer in llat,nre from the states of the suppression and manifesta- 
tion of potencies. 
I 
Well, but the nfRictions following: Neucience, which lmva their root ' ill Rescience, 
are removed on the removal of Xescience, and do not after the removal of Nescisnce stand 
in need of any obher effort distinctl thcrefroul to remove them. In t h e  same way, seeing 
that the potencies having their origin in t h e  outgoing acts of the mind are mmoved 
by the removal of the outgoing activity itself, the potency of sllppression should not be 
needed further for their removal. For this reason the BhBppkira says :-l The potencies 
of the outgoing, &C.' It is not necessary that the effect shoald be removed by the mere 
removal of the cause. The cloth is n3t destroyed by the removal of the weaver. The 
fact is that bhe effect rphiqh is of t h e  natnre of t h e  cause itself, is ouly removed upon - 
the removal of fha t cause. 
The afflictions which have -11 
described as following Nsscience have been said to be 
of the natnm of Mesoience itself, It is, therefore, very proper that they should be removed 
on the removal of Nescience. It is not ilm this way that potendes are of the naf are of 
the acts of Cognition ; becailse it is seen that memory exists even though the acts of 
Cognition have been suppressed for s very img time. For this reasor1 although the acts of 
Cogllitioll may have ceased for a long time, it is necessary that the storage of potencies 
of suppressioll be attended to for the removal of the poteiloies originating ill the acts. 
The rest is s2sy.-9. 
Satra 10. 
Tasva, 
CI 
ite. 
Praslnta-vlhitl, andisturbed (m) Flow (*) 
m, 
Barpskiira t, by potency. 
. 
10. By potency comes its undisturbed flow.--116. 

CR. TII. 
ON ATTAIA7NEAvTS, 226, 117. 
187 
Undisturbed flow comes to the mind by the deftness of practice in 
the generating of the mental potencies of snppression. In case the poten- 
cies are weak, the potency charac terizecl by suppression is overpowered 
by tho potency chamcterized by outgoing activity.-1 16. 
b 
VACHASPATIS GLOSS. 
Of what sort is the chauge of the mind brought ahoot by means of the powerful 
suppressive tendency, when the potencies of outgoing activity have been altogether 
overpowered ? In answer to the question the authoh says :-' By potency comes its un- 
disturbed flow.' 
L' Undisturbed flow" means the flow in uninterrupted succession of the suppressive 
potencies alone, free from the impurity of the outgoing potencies. 
But then why does it stand in need of the deftness in generating potencies ? TVhy 
not potency alone ? For this reasell t h e  Bhlgyakira says :-' In case the potencies are 
weak, &C.' 
The potcncies referred to are those of snppression. Those however who read 
r ' 1106' before ' overpowered,' esplni~l the potencies to he those of the outgoing activi- 
ties.-10. 
--- 
SQtra I r .  
wfdin Sarv$rthatl, of all pointedness. 
EktZgsath one pointedness, of 
these two. W Ksayn, the destruction (of all pointedness). 
Udaya, the rise (of 
one pointedness) these two respectively oE the previous two. h 
Chittasya, of 
the mind. v++%wI: SamLidhi-parip hmab, the trance modification. 
11. The trance modification of the mind is the des- 
truction and rise of all-pointedness and one-pointeclness, 
All-poin tedness is a cliarnc teristic of the mind. One-pointednew, is 
also n characteristic of the mind. The destruction of all-point~dness is its 
disappearance. The rise of one-pointedness is its appearance. The mind 
puts on both these characteristics. This mind then following along both 
these characteristics oE 
destruction and manifestation which make its 
very nature, inclines 
*
A
.
 
towards. contemplation. This is* the trance modi- 
/ - 
ficntion of the mind.-117. 
v 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Xow'thc author shows the state of the mental change totvards Cognitive trance.' 
The trmco modification of the mind is the disappearance and rise of all-pointedness and 
one-pointednew respectively.' 
, 
h 
I 
j 
c '  
a 
I 

188 
PATANJALI'S YOQA. 
All-pointedness means distractedness. It cannot be destroyed ; hence its destruc- 
tion is only its disappearance. Nothing mhich exists is destroyed. Rise is appearance. 
The disappearance and birLh of the characteristics of all-pointedness and one-pointed- 
ness mhich are of the very nature of the mind, means that the disappearance is to be ot 
all-pointedness, m d  the appearance is to he of one-pointedness. The mind following 
these too becomes inclined towards trance. The meaning is that it becomes qualified 
by the trance condition which is achieved gradually by the latter condition becoming 
the former,-11. 
S ~ t t - a  12. 
m: Tatab thence. F: Punab, again. 
&nta-uditau, the subsiding and 
rising. (m) (a@) 
Tulya-pratyayau, having similar. (W) Cognitive, acts. 
(m) h 
Chittasya, of the mind, mental. vmm Eklgrath, of the one-pointedness, 
sfim: ParipBmah, modification. 
12. Thence again comes the mental 
of one-pointedness, when the subsiding and 
tive acts are similar.--118. 
modification 
Of him whose mind is inclil~ed towards the trance modification, the 
foriner cognitive act subsides ; and the later that rises is similar thereto. 
The mind inclined towards trance is cornmoll to both. The same hap- 
pens again and again up to the eiid of trance. 
This of course is the modification -of the one-pointedness of the 
mind ~vbich exists as an irdiviilualized unit independent of the charac- 
teristics. -1 18. 
G-o 
V,~CHASPATI~S 
GLOSS. 
Thence again comes the mental inodification of one-pointedness, when subsiding 
and cognitive acts are simiisr.' 
Again, when trance having been achieved, the later state of trance becomes the 
former, the former subsides and the later cognitive trance modification arises. That is to 
say, one becotnes the past and the other the present. When both these cognitive acts of 
him who has become inclined towards trance, become similar to each other, it becomes 
one-pointed. This shows the achievement of trauce, and also of one-pointedness itself. 
The Bhigyrkara shows the limit :--' Up to the end of trance.'- 12. 
and in the instrumental phenomena. 
Dharma, the charactarietic quality. ww 

CR. III. 
ON ATTAlh'NBA7TS, 19. 
, 
18'3 

P~TNJALI'S YOGA. 
It must be understood that by describing as above the changes of 
characteristic, secondary quality and condition ,with refereelice to the 
mind, the change of characteristic, the change of secondary quality an(] 
the change of condition with reference to the objective forms of matter 
and instruments of action and sensation have also been described. 
, There, the disappearance and appearance of the characteristics of the 
outgoing activity and suppression were the~nodi 
fications of characte&tic 
(primary quality) in the characterized (the object as existing indepen- 
dently of the qualitly') ; also the modification of ~econdary quality. Sup- 
pression has three secondary qualities ; it is connected with three paths of 
being (adhvh). 
Having given up the first path of being which consist of ths 
secondary quality not yet manifested, it takes it up as a secondary quality 
existing in the present, althoygh it has not thereby overstepped its 
a primary quality. 
Lt is in this secondary quality which manifests in the 
present that its true nature is manifested. This is i t s  second path of 
being. It is-not devoid of the past and the yet-unmanifested qualitiee 
(l alqmqa). 
Similarly is the outgoing activity possessed of three secondary 
qualities and is connected with three paths of being. Having given up 

CH. III. 
ON ATTAINNENTS, ,I IS. 
101 
I 
' 
the present secondary qmli t,y, but not having given np its ~aracteristic, 
p' 
itputsitonastlleseconcl quality of the past 
This is i s  
I 
third path 
of being, and it is not devoid of the secontlnrr 
V qualities of the future aud 
the prese n t. 
Similarly, inclining again to outward activity, it gives bp the yet- 
uil~nanifested secondary qualit,y ; but not llnving given up its cllarnc- 
teristic of existence ns such, it gets on to it, as the seconclal-y yuality of 
the present, where manifesting its true iiature, it acts as such. This is 
its second path of being. 
A11d i t  is not devoid of the past and the future 
secondary qualities. 
. . 
Similai*lp, suppression ngilin and outgoing ac tlri t,y again. 
Similar is the modif cation of condition. I h i n g  moment of sup- 
1 
pression, the suppressive potencies 
. . .  arc being strengthened ; and the po- 
tewies ol the outgoing act~vltles are beins 
L mcakened. This is the 
modiGcntion 01 tlie conditions of the characteyistics, 
r i  
1 llus the ohjec t i r c  changes by l l ~ e n l ~ s  
of the cliaractei*isttcs ; the cha- 
racteristics posses~ed of three paths of beiug are changed by means of secon- 
dary qunli t ies ; tlie secondary c p s l i  ties too are modified into conditions. 
Thus is it that the functioning of the " 
" is never clevoid 
wen for a moment of the changes of the cbardcteristics, secoudaxy quali- 
ties and conditions ; and tile functioning oE the qualities consists in 
I 
I 
ceaseless activity. It has further been said that thecause of the activity 
of the ' q ~ a l i t ~ i e s  
' is tlleir very nature. 
13y this must be understoocl tile three-fold change in the objective 
and instrwmen tal phenomena, cl ue to the conception of n distinction bet- 
ween the characteristic and the characterized. I n  real it-y, however, there is 
but one change, because the characteristic is the very being itself of the 
clwacterized ; and it is the change of tile characterized alom that is 
detailed by ~ n e a ~ l s  
of the characteristic. 
Tt is only the characteristic 
present in the characterized object that changes states in the past, the 
present and future, the substance is not changed. Thus when a vessel of 
gold is broken to be made into something else, it is only the conclition 
that chauges, not the gold. 
Another says :-The 
characterizecl is nothing more than the charac- 
teristic, iunslnucll as the reality of tile former does not overstep the 
latter. If it were something CO-existgut, it would change as an indepen- 
dent existence on1 y, simply changing into distinct anterior and posterior 
conditions. 
This is no defect. 
Why ? .Oecause constancy is not found therein. 
!Uus the three worlds give up their individ ual appearances, because 

192 
PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
eternity has been denied to them. Yet they exist in the case of disap- 
pearance also, because destruction lins been denied to them. 
Further its subtlety is due to conjunctive existence ; and it is not 
perceived on account of its subtlety. 
The change of secondary quality is the moving of the cllaracteristic 
along the paths oE being. The past characteristic joined to the past 
secondary quality, is not devoid of the foture and the present secondary 
quality. 
Similarly, the present (chnracteristicj joined to the present secondary 
quality is not devoid of the past and the future secondary quality. Simi- 
larly, the future joined to the future secondarv 
V quality is uot devoid of 
the present and past secondary qualities. 
o r  example, a man who 
is attached to one woman, does not hate all thee others. 
Others find a fadt .in this change of secondary qnali ties. They 
say that all the qualities being in simultaneous existence, their patlls of 
being must be confused, (and thus overlapping one another cannot be 
considered as distinct and different). 
This is thus met with. That the characteristics do exist as such 
requires no proof. 
When there is such a thing asa characteristic, the 
differences of the secondary qualities also must be posited. 
It is not onlv 
W 
in the present time that the characteristic characterizes. 
If it were so 
the mind would not possess the characteristic of attachment, seeing tllat 
attachment is not in i~~anireestat~ion 
at the t h e  of anger. Further the three 
secondary qualities are not possible of existence i n  one individual simul- 
, 
taneously. They. may however appear in succession by virtue of the 
operation of their several causes. And so it has been said :-'The 
'inten& 
ties of nature and those of function are opposed to eacll other ; but the 
ordinary manifestations CO-exist with the in tense ones.' Therefore, there is 
no confusion. For example, attachment being in the height of manifes- 
tation with refereuce to some object, it does not for that reason cease to 
exist with reference to all other objects. On the contrary it is then ordinari- 
ly in existence with reference to them. 
Similar is the cave with the secondary qualities. It is not the 
posssessed of the three paths of being. It is 
posses~ed of the thee paths. They may be 
the visible ones assume different conditions, 
differently because the conditions are differ- 
This is in the same way as the figure of 1 
hundred in the place of hundred, and one in 
characterized object that is 
the characteristics that are 
visible or istent. Of these 
and afe termed accordingly 
ent and not the substance. 
means ten in the place of ten, 

CR. III. 
ON ATTAINMENTS, 119. 
193 
the place of unity. 
Or again a woman, although one, is called a mother, 
I 
a daughter and a sister. 
Some make the theory of change of condition defective as rencler- 
! 
i n g  independ;& 
existelm necessary. 
How ? There being intervals he- 
twem the operatiolls of the paths of being a characteristic is the future 
one, wl~en it does not pelform its function ; it is the present one ~vlwn 
it does ; it has become the past when it has ceased to operate. 
Now the tlefect that the oppo~lents find is that in this way, the 
l 
characteristic a d  the cllurncterized object? as also the secondary quality and 
the co~~clition 
must necessarily be considered as intlependent existences. 
This is no defect,. Why ? On account of the variety due to the 
in torac tion of the ' qunl i ties ' eve11 in case of tlie ' qualified ' being perm:\- 
nent. 
A s  the coming together of the in~?estructibl.e qualities of sound, 
,. 
&C., is only a clrai-acteristic having a beginning and is destructible, so 
also is the nnc.lilfeentite phenomenal state S?f matter with a beginning, 
and is only a clmacteristic of the indestructible ' qualities ' of Essentinli- 
e 
ty, C . ,  and isassucll destructible. It is for this reason that it is termed 
1 
R ' Vikdra, a product. 
Here is an illustration in this connection. Clay 
is I 
object possessed of characteristics. Its existence in the shape of a 
sod is a. cl~aracteristic thereof. 
Given up this particular characteristic 
takes up the form of a a
.
 111 the forin of jar its secondary quality 
gives up its futurity and comes to possess the secordsry quality as mani- 
fested in the p~~esent. T t thus clml~ges its secondarv 
W qunl i ty. 
The jar 
changes, sl~owi 
ng cornpaixtive ol (l ness and newness every ~noment. This 
is change ol condition. 
Another characterist,ic taken up by the characterized substratum 
is but a change of conditioli. 
Of the characteristic too another secondary 
quality is a change orcondition. It is, thereforei the change of one sub- 
stance only that is thus shown by differentiation. 
I n  this way this may 
be applied to other t1lirlg.s also. Thus it is that the change of cllaracter- 
istic, secondary qualit,y and condition do not overstep the being of the 
characterized suhstratwn, ancl it is for this reason that there is but one 
change which runs through all these specializations thereof. 
# 
Well what is this change ? 
Change is the manifestation of another 
characteristic on the removal of the previous characteristic of a substance 
which remains constant.-119. 
The author classifies the changes of the objective and instrumental phenomena of 
matter, whose use will be described later, but whose occasion has come now: - g  By $hie 
46 

PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
the changes of characteristic, secondary quality and condition i11 the objective and 
instrumental phenomena have been described.' 
The Commentator explains :-' It rni~st be unclcrstoocl, &c. 
The question is that it is 
/ 
the fact only of mental change that has been ~uentionecl, not its modes in the shape of 
characteristic secondary quality and condition. How is i t  then that they are spoken 
of here over and above that ? For this reason hr? says :-g 
There the disappearance and 
appearance of the characteristics of outgoing and suppression, &C.' 
The brief meaning is 
that the words of characteristic, seconclary quality and condition have no doubt not been 
used, brit i t  is not that for that reason the cllarlges thcmselves of characteristic, secondary 
quality and condition have not boon describecl. Thus ifi the apl~orism :-' l'Iw.suppressivo 
modifications ' &c. (Ill. 9, 
the change of characteristic, is spoken of. 
E'nrthcr he sags that by showing this change of charficteristic, the change of second- 
ary quality also in the characteristic taken ss su1)stratnm indicated :-'So 
also the 
change of secondary quality.' 
hcondary quality stands for ' Lsksarrs.' 
. . 
I t  means that by which something is 
cated. This quality is due to difference in time. It is by time that a thing is given 
> 
. 
certain qualities by means of which it is cliflerei~tiated from certain thiugs standing in 
a different relationship to time. 
* 
Suppression has three different secondary qualities. It is but another mode of say- 
ing that it is related to three paths of being. 
The word ' adhv5,' path of being, implies 
time. 
" Having given up the flrst path of being, which consists of the secoi~dnry quslity 
not get manifested."-, 
The question arises, ' Does this suppression, while giving up the first path of heing, 
overstep the nature of the characberistic too in the same way as it gives up the path of 
being ?' The Commentator says that i t  does not :-' Although i t  has not overstepped its 
quality too.' 
It does not orerstep its characteristic, but takes up the secotldary quality as exist- 
ing in the presetlt. The same suppression which had not manifested yet, has now con10 
iuto present existence, not that suppression has become non-suppression. 
The meaning of the nature of n thing existing in tllo present is now described :--'If 
is in this secondary quality which manifests in the present that its true nature is mani- 
f es ted.' 
True nature ' is that which performs the f unction proper to its existence as such. 
Manifestation means its essentialization as such. 
With reference to the yet unmanifested first path of being this is its secoud path of 
being. 
Well-if i t  be so that it gives up the yet nnmanifested path of being and takes up the 
present, and that having given up the present state, i t  will pass on to the past path of being, 
then, it necessarily follows that paths of being are subject to birth and destruction. T h b  
however is not proper, because nothing is born that exists not, nor is anything that 
I 
exists destroyed. For this reason the Commentator says :-' And it is not devoid of the 
past and the yet unmanifested secondary quality,' which go on existing in their generio 
mspecialized state. 
Having shown the secondary quality of the present existence of the yet n n m a n i f a  
suppression, the Commentator now shows the third path of being, the pmsingaon to the 
put of the present outgoing activity : - 
" Similar is the outgoing activity, &o." 
Well then does suppression alone exist in the yet unmanifested state, not outqoing 
&iivity ? The Corameatator says No :-' Similarly ipclining again to outward ~ t i v i t y ,  
&Q.' 

I 
1 
CR. III. 
ON ATTAINMENTS, 119. 
105 
This repeated manifestation of the oi~tgoing activity is not the manifestation of 
any individuaJ output thereof. It is a manifestation of the same class only. That which 
I 
has passed cannot come back. 
l 
" The manifestation of true nature is the essentializatiou of the object as possessing 
~ 
the capscity of performing its proper function." 
It is this change of secondary quality thus descri@d, which appears with reference 
to objects of the same class over and over again. For this reason the Commentator says :- 
' Similarly, suppression again, &C.' 
Now he describes the change; of condition which is indicated by the change of cha- 
racteristic : -' Similar is the modification, &C.' 
The strength and weakness of the characteristics in their present path of being, are 
their conditions. The increase or decrease of weakness ancl strength every moment is 
the change of condition. 
He sunlmarizes : '  
This is the inodificatiori of the conditions of the characteristics.' 
NOW he determines the diff went relation of the different changes :-' Thns the object 
changes, &C.' 
,' 
Is then this change of the qualities ' only occasional ? He says No :-' Thus it is that 
the functioning of the qualities is never, be.' 
Rut then why i's this change ever-existent ? He says :-' The flynetionin of the 
qualities consists in ceaseless activity.' 
The word 'and ' in this sentence means a canse. 
Functioning means action. But whence t h i ~  functioning itself ? He says :-' It is 
of their very nature.' 
L It has been said' here in before. 
This three-fold change of the mind is taught by the author of the Aphorismsto be 
existing in the objective and instrumental phenomena of matter. He says : 
- ' By this 
must be understood, &C.' 
'This' means the distinction between the characteristic and the characterized. 
When the distinction between the characteristic and the chara,cterizecl is kept in sight, 
the physical elements of Prithvi, &C., are the objects characterized, and the hodies of 
cow, &C., or the jar, &C., are the changes of the characteristic thereof. The forms which 
the characteristics put on in the past and the y e t  uninanifested and the present ones con- 
stitute the chnnge of their secondary quality. When the cow, &., have taken up t h e  
secondary qualities as misting in the present, their change of condition consists in their 
taking up the states of the newly-born calf, a little advanced in age, youth and old age. 
In the case of the jar, &C., too, their newness and oldness are their changes of condition. 
Similarly are the instrumental phenomena the characterized objects. The, taking 
in of this or that blue, &C., is the change of characteristic of the sense of sight. The 
change of secondary quality consists in the assumption by t h e  characteristic of the quali- 
. 
ties due to t h e  existence in the present, &C., as such. The present sensation of a jewe:, 
&C., may be distinct or iudistinct. This is its change of conditiou. 
The change of the objective and instr~ment~al 
phenomena is described, looking upon 
the characteristic, the secondary quality and condition as distinqt from the characterized. 
Now the Commentator speaks of them when they are looked upon-as the same :-'In 
reality, however, there is but one change, &C.' 
Tlra word ' huwever ' turns away from the 
other view according to which t h e  characteristic and the characterized are looked upon 
as distinct. Its reality is made known here, not that the mture of change is de'nied to 
the other, For what reason? Becauso the ~haract~eristic 
is the very being of the chtlrac- , 
torized.' 
The question is that if the characteristic is only a modification of t h e  oharncterized, 
how irr it that people do not confuse the notions of the changes ? For this reason he 
sr 

P~TANJALI'S 
YOOA. 
says :--' And it is the change of the characterizdd alone that is detailed through tho cha- 
racteristic.' 
By the word ' characteristic " here are understood all the t'hree tllings, 
namely, characteristic, secondary quality and condition. All this is the modification of 
.the characterizccl alone by means of them. There is, therefore, but one change of tho 
characteristic, &C., one not confused with the others, because 'there is no real distindtion 
between them, the charact,erized objects t2hemselves do not overlap one another. 
The question arises that inasmuch as the characteristic and the characterized are 
not different from each other, and because t h e  paths of being of the characteristic objects 
are clifferent, the characteristic also mist in this case behave as t k e  characterized 
object, on account of the clmracteristic and the characterized object being the same. 
For this reason he says :-' It is only the characteristic present in the characterized, &ce' 
That changes states'' :-The 
word ' state' here malls a different arrnngcmcnt of the 
thing, a different appearance. Thus when vessels of gold are styled differently as a Rucha- 
ka and Svastika, they differ only so far ; not that the substance gold becomes not-gold. 
The reason is evident-. They do not differ entirely. This will be stated further on. 
The Con~mentator brings forward tlm example of the B;~~ddha, 
who holds that tho 
characteristic only is what exists :-"Another 
says :--It is only the characteristics of 
the Ruchaka, &C., that are being thus born, which are the realities. There is no such 
thing as gold which might be looked upon as a substance remaining the same among more 
changes than one. If there be such n thing as substance which repailis constant even 
though the chsracteristics arc being changed, then that thing would be immutable like 
the power of consciousness. It would become an independent redity ; independent, that 
is to say, of the change which is of the very nature of tlhe thing appearing to change. As 
the power of consciousness does not give 11p its nature even though the qualities ' are 
constant1 y putting on different appearances, and is therefore independently eternal, so 
also would gold, &C., 
become independently eternal. This, however, is not desirable. 
Therefore the characteristic is not diflerent from the characterized ; the substance is 
not different from the qualities." 
The Commentator refutes this argument :-' This is no defect. Why ? 
Because 
constancy is not found therein.' 
We might admit this if we found that as a matter of fact the substance was constant 
in its so-called eternity like unto the power of col~~sciousness. We, however, do not fins 
this constancy of eternity. 011 the other hand the whole of this world, to say nothing 
of one substance only, is seen giving up its individual appearances ; the appearances, 
that is tb say, that are meant to perform certain functions. 
// 
How is this? On account of eternity being denied to them by the authority of 
reasoning. If a jar of earth did not give UP its individuality of appearance, it mould 
ylainly be seen as a jar even when it existed in t h e  condition of a half-jar or in that of 
powdered clay, &c. ; and it would go 011 performing its function too all t h e  sdme as before. 
Heace the three worlds are non-eternal. 
Well then let it be noneternal alone, being practically quite non-existent as it is 
like the lotus of the sky, on account of its universality and the non-performance of any 
function. For this reason ire says :-'It exists in the case of non-appearance also, because 
destruct ion has been denied to it.' 
The meailing is that it is not so very illsignificant as to be altogether non-eternal 
and therefore to be classed as non-existent. Why? Because destruction has been denied 
to it by reason. 
Thus stands the reasoning :-- 
That which is non-existent is never visible alld does not perform any function, as 
the lotus oi the sky. 

-F 
1 
CH. III. 
ON ATTAINMENTS, 119. 
107 
The three worlds, however, sometime have some functions and are visible. 
So are the following causes proving its existence to be mentioned. 
A thing is seen 
being born ; characteristic secondary quality and conditions are ever found appearing 
therein. Bor tpis reason they are out of the category of such non-existent things as the 
lotus of the sky and the horns of a man. 
It is not, therefore, constant in its eternity, SO that i t  may be classed with the in- 
dependent reality of consciousness. On the contrary itsis only in a way eternal. This 
also proves that it is changefnl. It is eternal in its change. 
By this it must be understood that in a piece of clay exist its effects the staZcs of 
the jar, &C., which have not yet expressed themselves. Well, let that be. 
But i f  it exist 
even if removed, how is it that it is not perceived as before ? . For this reason the Com- 
mentator says :-'It 
becomes subtle on account of conjunctive existence, that is, on 
account of its nergence into the casual state. It becomes unperceivable on account of its 
subtlety and is not, therefore, perceived.' 
Having thus explaitled the change of characteristic the Commentator now explains 
the change of secondary qualities also a s  such secondary qualities. 
' The change of secondary qualities, &C.' 
The meaning is that each secondary quality is followed by others nlo11g with itself. 
The question is that inasmuch as at the time of conjunction with one secoiidary quality, 
the others arc not perceived, how can it be said that the others also are present along with 
it ? Bor this reason the Cornmen tator says :-' For example, a man who is attached to 
one woman, &C.' The non-existence of perception does not disprove the existence of 
anything, proved to exist by other means of knowledge. The birth itself of a thing at 
diifIercnt placas is a reason for its existence. Nothing that exists not, can be born. 
A8 
for example, the horn of a man. 
The Commentator states a defect suggested by another :-' Others fincl a fault in 
this change of secondary qoality.' 
If the past and the present, exist a t  t h e  time when 
tho present characteristic is in existence in the present, then the thrce paths of being 
must overlap one another. If, however, the paths come into being one after the other, 
the11 it comes to this that the non-existent coiues into existence. This is the mealling. 
He refutes the argument :-' This is thus met with, 
C
.
 The existence of the 
characteristics in the present is only proved by perception. It also,gives the k110wteQp 
of its existence in the past and in the future as related to the present. It is plain that 
the nowexisting does not come into existence and the existing is not destroyed. He 
says the same :-'If 
it were so the mind .u70uld not possess, &C.' 
The mind i~ foond posses- 
sing the characteristic of attachment after the time of anger has passed away. If it be 
that attachment did not exist a t  the time of anger as P capable of manifestation in the 
future, how could i t  be borll ? And if not born, how could it be perceived ? 
It may be so. Even then, however, how is i t  proved that pat,hs of being do not 
overlap ? He gives the answer :-' Flirther the three secondary qoalities, &C.' 
The three 
secondary clualities are impossible of esistdhce simultaneously. Where ? In one mental 
modification. In succession, however, one of the qualities does come into manifestion 
I by virtue of its manifesting cause. The ascertainment of the secondary qualities being 
r dependent upon tlio thing qualified thereby, it is along with t h e  form of the thing 
qualified that the mind becomes possessed of the qoalities. He quotes Paficha:iikh& 
, dch&rya on this very subject :-' And so it has been said, &C.' This bas been explained 
before. He summarizes : - l  
Therefore there is, &C.' 
On account of the contrary charac- 
teristics of manifestation and disappearance remaining merged in the cause, the paths 
of being do not overlap. He gives an illustration :--' For example, attachment to, &c,* 
The knowledge of the existence of attachment with anger was explained before. 
Xow. 

PATANJA LI'S YOGA. 
however, is explained the existenco of relationship existing between attachment with 
respect t o  one object and attachment with reference to another. He applies the illustra- 
tion to the subject to be illustrated :--l 
Similar is the case with secondary qualities &C.' 
l 
The question is that inasmuch as identity can exist even thongh the identical 
object may not be perceived as such altogether, i t  follows that characteristic, secondary 
quality and coilclition being distinct phenomena, the characterized object which is notiling 
separate from them, should also be considered t o  be distinct from itself under each and 
every one of these varying states. He says that this view is not desirable, because i t  
is contradicted by the perceptiofi of h e  identical substance remaining the szme nncler all 
varying states. 
L It is not the characterized object that is possessed of the three pathx 
of being,' because the characteristics which are not distinct from it, are possessed of the 
three patl~s of being, The fact of the taking up of the three paths of being of the chsmc- 
teristics is further elucidated :-They are either visible, i. e., essential, present, or latent, 
that is not ijz esse. These are the past and the future. Of these, visible ones assume dieer- 
ent states of strength a d  weakness, &C., and are termed accorclingl y different1 y, because 
the states are diflerent, not the substance. By the word state are t o  be understood Bere 
all the three things, namely, characteristic, secondary quality and condition. This is the 
meaning It is only perception ss such that establishes the distinction from, or the identity 
of the characterized object ~ i t h  
t h e  characteristic, the secondary quality or t.he condi tioo. 
If there were unqualified identity between the characterized object and the characteristic. 
BC., then characteristics, &C., wonld no longer be what they are. They would not clualily, 
characterize and condition, as does not the very substance of the characterized object 
itself. Nor woold they qualify the characterized object in case of unqualified distinction ; 
as the horse and the cow can in no way become the characteristic, secondary quality and 
condition, each of the other. Perception establishes that the characteristic and the 
secondary quality are neither totally distinct nor completely identical with the charac- 
terized object, and it also shows that t h e  characteristics, &C., have all of them the proper- 
ties of sppcaranco and disappearance, and that during these changes the object remains 
the same; andit also shows that the characteristics are not mnturlly exclusive. This is SO 
. 
perceived by every individual self. W e  follow this common perception. It is not com- 
petent to 11s to leave that aside and establish some theory of t-he perception of charac- 
- 
teristics which may please ourselves. 
The Commentator gives on this very subject an illustration from the world : --' This 
i s  in the same way as figure of 1 &c,' 
A4 the nature of unity remains the same, alt,hough with reference to its relative 
position i t  is styled as hundred, &C., so also the nature of the characterized object remains 
the same but it is styled diflerently on account of the differences brought about by t h e  
distihctions of distinct characteristics, secondary qualities and conditions. This is the 
meaning, 
He gives another illustration to elucidate the subject to be illustrated :-' O r  a g a h  
a woman, although one, &C.' 
In this connection he ilitroduces the discussion of a defect considered as existing in 
this by others :-'Soote 
make the theory of the change of conditions, &C.' 
In the change of condition, i. C., the change of condition, of characteristic and secon- 
dary quality all the three, the defect of the imminence, of the independent existence 
of the characterized, the charactcristic, the secondary quality and the condition is point- 
ed out. 
He puts the questions :-How ? The answer is :-g 
There being intervals between the 
operations of the paths of being, &C.' 
The existence of milk as such in the present 
is the operation of the yet unmanifested path of being of curds. When on account of being 

C . .  III 
ON A TTA INM E NTS, 11 9, 1?0. 
199 
intercepted thereby, the characteristic of changiog into curds does not operate notwith- 
standingits presence in milk, then it is said to be yet unmanifested. When i t  does come 
iqto manifestation, it is said to be in present operation. When having achieved' the 
change, it ceases from the operation of setting ill the formation of curds, &C., then it is 
said to exist in the past. 
Thus the characterized, the characteristic, the secondory 
cluality and condition existing as thcy do all of them in a11 the three times, mnst be recog- 
nized as independent existences. Eternity is but esistence for ever. Farther, there 
being existence for ever, all t h e  four are never born. And this much and no more in 
the description of independent eternity (KCitastha nityata). The meaning is that t h e  
independent eternity of the power of coi~scious~~ess 
too has no other speciality. 
He refutes the argument :-' This is no defeat.' 
Why 3 On account qf the variety 
due to t h e  inter-action of the ' qualities ' even in the case of the qualified bring per- 
manent. Inter-action means the relation of overpowering and being overpowered by each 
other. The variety is of the inter-action. This is the meaning. Although the qualified and 
the qualities, all the four always exist, the eternity does not consist in being independent 
nf pheliolneilal changes, becaure the nature of their change consists in t lie appearance nncl 
disappearance of their modifications, which modificatiols altllough bronght dmnt by t h e  
variety of the inter-action of the qualities, are of the very 6eing of the thing modified. 
The power of consciousness, however, does not put forth any s ~ w h  
modifications pf its- 
own being as periodjcd appearance and disal~pearance. Its eternity; therefore, is inde- 
pendent of phenomenal change. As thcy say :-' He whose nature is not destroyed, the 
wise call constant in eternity.' 
Now he shows thnt the variety of inter-action is the cause of the variety of modifica- 
tion in the substratum (Prakpiti) and the Yilr8ras. the phenon~cna thereof. 
A s  t h e  coming 
together, which may be dcscri bed as the change into Prithvi, &c, has a beginning and is 
destructive, that is a disappearing characteristic only of sound, &C., i. C., of t h e  five taw 
mitras of sound, touch, form, taste and smell, which in relation to their effects arejndes- 
tructible, i.e., do not pass into latency. 
He shows the same in the case of Parkyiti :-g 
L'o also the undiffrre&iated phenomenal 
state of matter, be.' That is termed a product. Not however subject to such changes 
i s  the power of consciousness. 
This is the substance. 
Having illustrated the Prakriti and the product (Vikyiti), which are proved by 
philosophers, he new takes an illustration from the product itself well known in the world, 
jn order to show the variety due to the inter-action of t h e  qimlities which is the cause 
of the changes of the characteristic, the secondary quality and condition : ' Here is an 
illustration of this connection, &C.' 
It is not necessary thnt there. should be change of cpndition in the case of secondary 
qualities only. The characteristic, the secondary quality and. the condition a.re all im- 
plied here by the word condition (avsstha) in the text. All, therefore, is a change of con- 
ditions. For this reason he says : --'hothcr characteristic taken up by an object, &a.t 
H e  gives the definition of Change (Pa-i!lfima), 
which covers the whole connotation 
of the word :-'Change 
is the assumption by an existing object, &C.'-13. 
Sj'itra r4. 
m;ir fhata, to tnhe latent. JFCa Udita, to the rising. '~lm 
Avyapadesys, the 
~ n ~ r e d i c a b l e .  
4. Dhnrnm, cllaracteristics. PY* Anupbti, common, closely follow- 
ing. 
Dharmi, the object characterised. 

PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
14. " The object characterized " is that which is 
comnlon to the latent, the rising and unpredicable charac- 
saqiatr W& dbmGtPa I a~lmqqwr: 3i G weihi;ftrF;r I q h q  I 
Picmrfftii; ~rfhhm 
wrqQ czq I am waqrni 
q- 
qm;11 wmtfw%3 mr&;tq aafqrs;fft& I $n~~zm+Am?w- 
-I 
~3 ~UlWl?N'rnWIMkRftr 
I 
*6qh-~qfir&~ 
d q -  
gw8i mr~ftitmc 
*rs;ait wF7f I rnq g w & m f 3 +  W
C
~
 
mq 
m: 1 ~ m v i h  
amq rapq ~iii.itlr~- 
kjf~m ~ ? h r ~ h h  
yrmm TWEf9 WTrnrnf9Mh WEgrmrn~t~ karw* i t  iff 
W'dhWWri):sp~rS mhW19h I W*$ 
&?T$ 
f t ~ m q m  
11 18 a 
VPASA. 
Characteristic is the virtue (or power) of an object differentiated by 
fitness. Tlle existence of this fit ancl proper virtue of an object is infer= , 
red by the production of spe'cific results thereof, as found to be of one 
sort i n  oneaudof another sort in another :object). 
Of tllese characteris- 
tics the present is that which is showing itself in operat,ion 9 and it differ- 
entiates between those that have become latent and those that are nupredi- 
cable yet. 
When, Lowever, it coincides with the generic quality - common 
to all these states, then it becomes of the very nature of the object alone ; 
then wllat is it in itself, a i d  by what does it differ ? 
Now of the cllaracteristics of an object that are either latent, rising or 
unp~*etl 
ical.de, the latent are those that l w e  beell in operation ancl ceased. 
r pile rising cIlaracteristics are tlme that are in operation. They are itnme- 
diate postcedents of the yet unmanifested secondary quality. Those that 
hncre 
are the post~eclent~s 
of the present ones. 
Why are not the 
preserlt ones the immediate consequeuts of the past ? On account of the 
absence of the idation of atltececlence and postcedence (between the two). 
As tile relation of an tecetlence and postcedence exists between the present 
and the future, not so between it and the past. It is not, therefdre, the 

an. 1x1. 
ON ATTAINMENTS, 120. 
201 
4 
immediate antecedent of the past. For this reason it is.ody the yet un- 
manifested that is the antecedent of the present. 
What then are the unpredicable ? A11 are of the nature of dll. 
With regard to this it has been ssid :-The 
variety of all forms of juice, 
&C., 
due to the changes of earth and water, is seen in stationary objects. 
So also of the stationary in the self-moving arid of the self-moving in 
the stationary. Thus all is of the nature of all wi thoat the destrqction 
of species. This is subject to the limitations oE time, space, form 
I 
and clisposing cause. 
r Jheir natures certain tly do not manifest simul- 
taneously. 
' The characterized object ' is that constant nature thereof which 
remains cornmon~to all these rnanifest.ed and unmanifested characteristics 
and which is the substratum of both the generic and the specific. In 
the case of him, however, to wlrhom this is a cliaracteristic only without 
a substratum, there must be absence of experience. How is it possible 
to adopt one cognition as the enjoyer of the action done by another ? 
Further there would be no memory thereof, because no one can remember 
what has been seen by another. Further s sul~stratum common to chang- 
ing states does exist, because objects are called back to memory and 
recognized as such. It is this constant, substratum that is identified 
as surh even when it has taken up a different characteristic. 
For 
thiwi-enson it is not a mere characteristic, not common to different 
states.-l 20. 
VACHASPATI:CI GLOSS. 
The word 'characteristics' is used here to denote characteristic, secondary quality 
and condition, because that is tlla bnsic cluaiity. 
Thc Conmentator describes the 
characterized object \trhich is snbjec t to this three-fold change, by the aphorism :--" The 
' characterized object ' is that which is common to the latent, the rising and the unpredi- 
cable characteristics." The characterizcil object is ihat which is possossecl of o character- 
istic. It is not possible of being 1;nown milllout t h e  clmracteristic being known. He 
explains the characteristic :--' JXfferentintcd by fitness, &C.' 
The clisracteristic is the 
virtue of a substance, such as clay, &c. That is the power of its producing a powder, 
a kneaded lump, a jar, &c. 
All theso exist therein in a state of latemy (non-manifest- 
ation). 
If the characteristics exist in a state bf latency in an object, they havc to manifest 
themsclves. Uut they c10 not manifest without the help of such adjuncts as water, &C. 
Water, &C., do not however exist in tlie causal states of the objects that are produced 
Whence then do they come ? 
For this reason he 
says :-'i)iffcrcntiated 
by fitness. 
The power producing jars, &C., is differentiated by the fitness (capacity) of being depcn- 
dent for action upon tlie action of water, &c. Hence jars, &C., derive the capacitly of 
being helped into manifestation by water, &C., from their causes themselves. They are 
not accidental. This is the meaning. 
Or, it might be that the words, 
characterized by fitness" are an answer to the 
question. ' What is a charaoteristic ?' 
It is the virtue (power) of an object. 
The 
t o  

PATA~~JALT's 
YOGA. 
meaning is that it is their fitness alone that is the c.haracteristic. Hence i t  is proved 
that the characterized object is what is possessed of that. 
He rneutims authority for 
its existence :-' Tho existence of this fit and pi.oper virtue of an object is inferred by 
the production of specific results thereof, as found to be this or that,, that is, t h e  ditIerent 
appearances as powder, kneaded lump, a jar, &c. The meaning is that it is seen to be 
distinct in differeiit objects by t h e  observation of its effects, and the difference that is 
apparent in its effects. ' Found' means observed. 
. 
He now describes how a lump of kneaded d a y  w!iich is perceived as esisting in the 
present, differs from the state of its existence as powvder which has now become latent 
and the state of its existence as a jar which is yet ~rnpradicable :--( Of these character- 
istics the present is that, &C.' 
The lncaiiing is that iT they did ilot differ, the operntioi~s 
of the powder and the jar would also become similar to those of t h e  kircacled lump, and 
overlappiog be the' result. 
He now says that the distinction described is not possible in the case of a lamp 
which is yet in .the state of latency :--' When however i t  coincides with t h e  generic 
quality, &G.' 
What is i t  in itself and by what cli~ttingnishing 
trait should i t  differ ? 
Having thus descri bcd the distingnishi~yg traits G f  cllarac tcris tics, he now divides 
them :-' Kow of these clnracteristics of ail object. &C.' 
-The rising cliaracteristics arc those t-hat exist in bhe present. 
Now he explains the ailtcccdence ancl postcedence of the pathways of being :-.' 
They 
arc the immediate postccdcnts, &c*' He d i s  the reason :--Va7hy are not the present 
ones the immediate consecjuents of tlic past ? He states the reason :--h 
account of 
fho absence of the relation of antecedence and postcecleiice b e t ~ w e u  the two. He 
explains the non-perception of a thing by the object iu which i t  exists :-He 
also shows 
the non-l~erception of the existence by being the opposito of the perception thereof :-- 
g As the relation of antecedcnts and postcedcnce between tho ~et-nnmanifested and 
the present, &C.' He summarizes:-For 
this reason the yet-unmanifested is the only 
immediate antececle~& of 
the present, because the yet-~nmanifcsted precedes the 
l 
present. The past cannot be the a i l t e ~ ~ d e n t  
of the present. The present precedes the 
past ;ind is thercfore its aotecedant, llot mq.mdicslAe of it. Hencc is it est,ablished 
that the past is the least important of 6i-m pathways of bcing. 
Well, let tliat be. It is possible to clistingoisll the present and tlie past as being 
and hariilg bcen perceived rcspectircl~. The unl~redicable characteristics, however, 
frcm the very fact of their bcing ~ui~preclicable, arc ii~capable of being distinguislie& 
\+'ith 
this in mind lie puts tlle question :-' 
What are then the unpredicables ? And in 
J 
what objects are we to exaillino them ? ' I-Ie ansive~~s 
the qnestion : - - l  All are of the 
nature of all.' Kith regard to this it has been said : --(He establislles tlie snrncj. 
The 
variety of all forms of juice, &C., due to the changes of earth iod water, &C.' The liqaid 
is possessed of tho soniferous, tangiferons, laminiferous and gustifero~~s 
ultimate atoms. 
The earth (solid) is possessed of the soniferous, the tangiferous, the luminiferms, the 
gustiferous and tlie ocloriferons ultimate atoms. A modification of all these is seen in 
the variety of all the f o r m  of juice, &c,, found i11 the roots, fruits, flowclis, leaves, &C., of tree, 
creeper and cane-plant, BC. All these cannot be the modifications either of the solids 
or of the liclnids different in ~iaturc from themselves. It has-of course been shown that 
nothing can come out of nothing. 
Similarly the lnodifictation~ of unmoving objects are seen in m o ~ i n g  objects in the 
shape of a varietg of chyle, &c. It is of course the use of these fruits, &C., that brings 
about the wealth of the variety of forms, &c. 
Similarly is seen the modification of animals into plants. It is well-known that 
pomegranates become as big as Clie fruits of Tlila by obtaining a suck of blood. 

cn. m. 
O N  ATTAINMENTS, 120, 121. 
203 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
He concludes :-6 
Thus all is of t h ~  
nature of all, &o.' 
Thus all, i.e., liquid and 
solid, &C., is of the nature of all, i.e., juice, &c. He gives the reason thereof :--' Without 
destruction of species.' 
The liquidity and solidity (earthiness), the generic qualities 
of these, are recognized as existing everywhere, and they are not therefore destroyed. 
Well, but if all this is of the nature of all, then everything being present every- 
where always and in all possible modes, even those results which do not exist sirnub 
taneously should rnxlifest at onco. Bor certainly, when all the necessary causes of an 
effect are present, it would not delay in its appearance. For tehis reason he says :-- 
This is subject to the limitations of time, space, &c. Albhough everything can of course 
become the cause of everything, yet the operation of the cause is limited by space. 
Thus I(Osrnira (Cashmere) being the country of saffron, it will not grow in the PIlichiila 
country, even though the other causes of its growth were all present there. Hence 
saffron does not grow in the 1% iichila and other countries. 
SimiIarly there are no rains in the summer season ; theibefore no growth of rice is 
possible in that season. - Similarly a deer does not give birth to a man ; the form of man 
cannot arise out of tbnt of r deer. Gimilnrly, a man mlio is not virtuous, does not enjoy 
the nature of pleasure ; the disposing cause of virtue does not operate in him. 
Therefore 
it is that on account of the limitfations of space, time, fornl and disposing cause, the 
nature, i.e., existing objects, are not procloeed simul taaeously. 
,. _ 
EIaving thus divided the char:~cteristi&, he now describes the substratum as being 
common to all these states :--' The characterized object is that common, 
&C.' 
The 
generic is the nature of the characterized, the sa1)stratum ; and t h e  specific is the 
characteristic. The substrnti~nl is of the nature of both these. This is the meaning. 
Having shown that the substratum, the characterized object, appearing in all the 
states thereof, is proved by direct knowledge, he now calls to mind the undesirable oon- 
sequences of the theory of the Vainasika philosophers, who say that no independent 
substratum exists, a-nd that the mind is bat a momentary act of cognition : --' In the 
cass however, &c,' 
Further t h e  object is called back to ~nelnory and recognized as s u ~ h .  Yajiiadatta 
does not call back to mind what has been seen by Devadatta. Bor this reason whoever hag 
been the seer must be the recopiser.-14. 
S ~ t r a  15. 
R F ~  Krama, of succession. 
Bnyatvam, the distinctness. vfipmr Pariplma, 
of modifications. 
Anyntve, for the distinctness. $3: Hetub, the reason. 
l 
The distinctness of succession is the reason for 
. 
the distinctness of modifications.- 121. 

204 
PATAA'JALI'S YOGA. 
It the11 co~ning to this that there can be but one moclification for 
one substratum, it is said that the distinctness of succession becomes the 
cause of the clistinctness of modifications. This takes place as follows :- 
The order of causation is : the clay a s  powder, the c]oy lrneaded into 8 
lump, the clay 
4 appearing as a jar, the clay appearing as a half-jar, tlle 
clay appearing as a potsherd. 
q 
succession of a characteristic is that characteristic, 
comes 
appears in close sequence. This is the order of the sequence of the 
changes of the cl~aracteristic. The order of the cllange of secondary 
qualities is the sequential appearance of the present state of a jar out of 
its yet-unrnanifested state of existence. Similarly is there a succession 
for the passing into its past state, of the present state of the kneaded lump 
of claj7. 
There is no succession for the past. Why ? Inmediate sequence 
exists only where thei-e is a. relation of antecedence and postcedence. 
,$ 
That does not exist in the case of the past. Hence successioi~ exists in the 
case of two secondary qualities only. 
Such is also the succession in the case of the change of condition. A 
new jar begins to become old in immediate sequence of its appearance as 
a new one. This oldness is found being manifested in succession which 
follows the sequence of the moments of time, until it reaches the last 
stage. 
And this third change is distirlct from the cl~anges of characteris- 
tic and secoudary quality. All these successions find their being in the 
conception of there being a distinction between the characteristic and the 
characterized object, because the characteristic also bec~mes sometimes 
the characterized, in its relation to the nature of another cl~aracteristic. 
When, l~owever, the characterized object is spoken of as being what 
it really is, as not distiuct from the clmracteristic, then by viitue of that 
conception, the object: itself is described as a cllaracteristic ; and then the 
succession appears to be oue only. 
r' 

CH. III. 
ON ATTAIh7MENTS, 121. 
205 
- 
-- 
- 
- 
I 
The characteristics of the mind are two-fold, the conscious (or patent 
Parid~ista) and the uncorlscious (or latent, A-paridyista). 
Of these the 
patent are those that appear in consciousness as notions. 
The latent are 
those that are but the substance itself. 
They are seven only and it is 
by inference that their existence itself has been established. ' Supres- 
sion, characterization, potentialization, constant change, p11 ysical life, 
movements, power are the characteristics of the mind, besides conscious- 
ness.' 
Hereafter is introduced the subject of Samyarna to be performed' 
by a Yogi with the object of obtaining the lmowledge of any desirable 
subject, when he has mastered all the means of obtaining knowledge as 
described. -121. 
VBCHABPATI'B 
GLOSS. 
I 
' The distinctness of succession is the reason for 'distinctness of modifications.' Is 
one substratum subject only to one change, which may be described as characteristic, 
secondary qnalit.y, or condition, as the case may be ? Or, are t h e  changeg-of characteristk. 
secondary quality and condition more than one ? 
What does it come to then ? 
?: 
comes to this that the change must be one because the substratum is one. A wuse 
which has but one form, cannot produce a variety of effects, because the variety in 
that case would be causeless. 
This being the scggestion, it is said:-Distinct 
changes are posited, because the 
orders of succession are different. 
Observers of the world have plainly observed that an order obtains in the SW- 
cessioi? of the changes of one clay into dust, kneaded lump, jar, half-jar and sherds. It i. 
also seen that the secpence between powdered clay and kneaded lump is independent of 
the sequence between kneaded clay and jar : the sequeilce between a jar and a half-jar is 
quite another. The secluencr. between a half-jar and pot-sherds is again quite diflerent. 
In each of these one of the eleknents precedes another. The difference of order existing 
in one succession of changes establishes the distinctness of the changes. Although the 
substratum of clay is one, it puts on a succession of changes, whose order is established 
by allied characteristics appearing in succession to each other in due order. The 
appearance is not, therefore, causeless. This is the meaning. 
As is t.he case with the changes of characteristics, SO also is the di&illctness of the 
succession the reason for the distinctness of the changes of secondary qualities and 
the changes of condition. 
The same is illuminated by the Commentary 
:-C 
It comes to this that there 
can be but one modification for one substratum, &C.' 
' The succession of characteristic, &ca' :-The word ' succession' is used here t o  
denote that which succeeds, looking upon the one to be nothing distinct from the other. 
'Such is also the succession in the case of the change of condition.' 
And so it 
happens that the barley grain, even though kept with great care by a cultivator in a 
grain-pit is, on the lapse of a large number of years, reduced to a condition, such that 
the cohesion of its particles gives way to t h e  mere touch of hand, i.e., of being reduced to 
ail atomic condition. This is not possible to take place all at once causelessly in the case 
of new grain. It is, therefore, by a succession of different states appearin'g one after 
the othcr in moments of time as being small, smaller and smallest on the one side, and large, 
larger and largest on the other, that the specific condition appears 

YOGA. 
This distinctness of succession esists only in the case of di~t~inctness 
being conceived 
ns h e t w e n  the charateristic and the substratum. So he says : -- All thesc successions 
find their being, &C.' 
The state of the clrxracterized ancl the cliaracteriatic, are relative down from the 
undiflerentiated phenomen:il to the products, and vice versa, inesmnch as the solids, 
clay, etc., aro also cl~ar;\ctcristics in correlation with the ultimate atoms (the tanmAtras, 
or divine monsurcs). So he says : -' The characteristic also solnetilnes becomes the 
characterized object in relation to the uature of another characteristic.' 
When, however, the conception of the unity of the substratum and the characteristic 
is entertained with reference to tho real snbstratum, the nournend, i.e., when 
by 
virtue of that conception,' of the s~tbstratutn being common to all its states, the charm- 
terizsd object itself is considered as the chnrncteristic, then tilere is but one change, the 
change, that is tossy, of the characterized object alone. Characteristic, secondary quality 
and condition enter t.hen into the very being of the characterized. 
It is to be considered as. having been said by this that the substratum is far 
removed from t h e  state of constant independcnt eternity (Iifitastha ilityatl). 
Speaking of the change of characteristic, the Commentrator takes up in the context, 
the distinct-ions of the modality of the charateristics cf the mind 
:-g 
The characteristics 
of the mind, &c,' 
The conscious (patent) chara~t~eristics 
are those that cotuc into our consciousness, ot 
which we are conscious. The latent are those of which we have no direct knowledge. 
Those that appear, in consciousness as notions arc the real cognitions, &c. Suppros- 
aion, etc., are those that are but the substance itself. This explains that they arc not 
of the nature of illumin@tion. 
Well, but if characteristics are latent, they certainly do not exist a t  all. For this 
reason be says :-'And 
i t  is by inference that their existeuce as substance itself is 
eetabliahed.' 
The knowledge that comes through authority is also spoken of here as 
inferoncs by the similarity of their coming into existeuce after other knowledge. He 
mentions the seven characteristics by a verse :--' Suppression, &C.' 
Suppression is the ultra-cognitive state of mental modifications. It is known by 
authority as well ss by inference to be a state of residual potency. 
By- the word 'characterization' the author suggests virtue and vice. The reading 
in some places is 'Karma' (action) instead of 'Dharms' (characterization). 
There too 
virtue ~tnd vice cltused by action are to be understood, . Virtuous and vicioas tendon- 
oies of the mind (or, which is the same thing, good and bad character) are known by 
authority or inferred by the existence of pleasure and pain. 
Potentialization or the power which generates mental potenciej, is inferred by 
memory, 
Similarly is the constant change of the mind in evolution inferred from the fact 
of the mind being made up of the threc ' qualities' and of the function of the qualities 
being changeful. 
similarly physical life, the specific action of the mind which snstains physical life, 
Js inferred as a chsracteris:io of the unconscious mind by expiration and inspiration. 
Similarly are the movements of the mind, i.e., the acts which set the difIereut 
organs and parts of the body into motion, inferred by thesc very movements following 
thought in that direction. 
Similarly is power the subtle state of all the effects of thought which manifest in 
&inn (It is the idea of all actions). That this also as a characteristic of the mind, is 
inferred by seeing the gross appoaranoes due to the mental images thereof.--15. 

CB. III. 
ON ATTAILC'MENTS, 122. 
207 
- 
Pnri~itma-traya, the three fold change. *F Samyambt by 
Samyama over. q7im AtPta, of the past. m m  knbgata, of the future. m. Jiibnam, 
Imowledge. 
F 
16. By Sirrn.?jnrna over tEle threk-fold change, comes 
-C 
- 
the knowledge OL the past ancl the future.--122. 
~ l - 2 1 ~ ~ .  
I 
I3y Sal12 y a t ~  
over t l ~ e  chauges of characteristic, secondary quality 
and condition, coines to the Yogis the knodedge of the past and the 
future. The triad of concentratioi~, medit:~tion and trance together has 
been tcrinecl ~ n ~ p ~ a r n a .  
W h n  direct knowledge of the three-fold change 
is obtained by m a n s  of Samyama, knowledge of their past and present 
Hc~rccforwa~d 
up to the end of the chapter, the objects of Sapgcma and the attain- 
tnetlts which indicntc it~astcry over them, are discussed. Of these, the fir& object of the 
St,rnyamu of s Yogi, familiar lVitll :all the accessories of Yoga, that is introduced, is the 
trincl of chnnpcs itself, w l i o s ~  n~odality has alrcady been described :-' By Samynnm over 
the: three-fold chauges, comes the knowleagc of the past and the future.' 
The question i:j that iilnsmuch as direct knowledge is obtained only of the object 
mif 11 reference to w l ~ i c l ~  
sci y !,!cc mu is performed, how is it that the Sctmyco~m on the triad 
of cliangcs will b c c o i ~ ~  
the cause of tllc direct knowledge of the past and the future ? 
Ror this reasan the Cotn.ncihtcr says :-Wllcn 
direct knowledge of the three-fold change 
has beell ohtaimd 
DICRIIS of S L I ~ ~ I ) I ~ ,  
the linowlcdge of the past and the future, having 
as they do the relation of CO-cxistoilce with these clmrges, is also brought about. 
The 
direct knowledge :of the triad of changes itself, is thc direct knowledge of the past and 
the present which it coml)rchencls. Thc wry esseucc of t'hc one beillg t h e  essence of the 
othcr, the objcc t of Scr m yclcl wa :wcl direct koowledge arc not clifleront (in the aphorism). 
This is the weaning.-16. 
Siltra 17. 
fkhdda, the word. 
~4 Artha, the meaning, the object. m m  Pratyaya the 
idea of all these. 
T* 
Itsretari, of each with the other. m, 
Adhybslt, because 
of the coinciding. v
~
:
 
Sar$inrah, bsco~niug one, appearing ss one. 9 Tat, their. 
&m Pravibhaga, distiuctions. 
Saqmnbt, by Samyama over. 8$ Sarva, all. 
m BhBta, of living being. 
arr Rnta, of the sounds. m Jiibnam, knowledge. 

- 
t 
X ' "  
. 
\ 

cn. IZI. 
ON ATTAINMENTS, 123. 
m 
209 
understancling) all at once, having taken np a, nnified appearance just 
ns the last li tern1 smnd ceases. 
Literal sourlcls, f t*om the iznpossibility 
of being expressed si;nol taneousl y, have not the nature of giving support 
, 
to each other. 'rhcy appear and disappear s h m ~ i n g  no connection with 
the particular wvorrJ, nor bringing it in to consciousnesa 
It is, therefore, 
said that each of them is not the word (itself 1. 
The lettej*; Ilomever, is singly a constituent of the word ; it has the 
potentiality of supplving 
U 
a name for all objects ; it is, as it were, of 
universal application, i nitsmucll as it appears in combination with every 
conjoined letter, it takes tliReren t places in different co~nbinations, some- 
t irnes -being placed before and soine ti mes after another letter. 
Thus 
there are many literal s ~ ~ ~ t u l s ,  
which being placed i11 different orders, 
l d p  in denoting, by ccmveu tion, certain di Iferan t sounds accorJing to the 
difference in the older of their poui tious. 
For example, the literal sound 
of g, au, antl h, possessetl 3s they are of the potenti:~lit~y of giuing names 
t3 all objects, denote in tllis particular order (gnuh) the particular object 
, 
~olhAl is possessetlof udclers,&c.,(ncow). 
A 117ortl is that single manifestation of 
consciousness, ~vl~icll 
appears just as the succession ol literal s o u l d s  limited to a particular 
cor~rentioilal meaning ceases ; it is a conwutional sign for the tliing 
t 
signified. 
Thus a sill& word is perceived as a single manifestation of con- 
sciourness ; it is brought iuto e~ist~ence 
by a single effort ; it has no parts 
no ordel* ; it is not a w l d c  of separate and distinct literal sonnds. It 
ness by the operation of the notion of the last literal sound ; it is ~ulclel.- . 
stood by the mind of the world, as llaving come into existence by conjunc- 
tion of 1ettel.s) on account of the eternal habit brought about by its ever 
having been with the help of l item1 sounds, separately named, uttered 
allcl heard, that the power of speech has f u l d o n e d  for tile purpose of 
by conventional meaning, saying that such and such a succession of so 
* 
lrlnny It-iters, so ending, denotes such and such an object. 
Convention, ilowever, is a inmifest atio n of memory showing the 
o ~ j c c t ' - ~ u ~ l l  
is the conwntion showing the one correlated to the other. 
Thnsdo \vortl, meaning and idea run ivto each otlm on account 

the object cow and the idea cow. 
Whoever lrnoms their distinction 
knows all. 
And in all mords lies the power of a sentence. If you say " A. tree," 
the word ':is' is understood, innsmucll as the object signified by a word 
never fails of existence. 
r 
Siinilarlv 
U no action is possible withorit its means. 
I'hs on pro- 
nouncing the word ' coolts,' d l  the appliauces necessary for the act o f  
cooking are meant to be understood. 
It is only for the purpose of spe- 
cialization that tlie object, the subject ancl the ii~strument such as Chaitrn, 
fire a~ld rice are expressly mentionecl. 
Tllen is also seen the cornbination of mords in sentences for expres- 
sing meaaing6: by the entire sentences. 'The Vedic student reads the 
hyinrls, lives, bears life.' 
I11 a sentence like this the mords and the 
meanings of words we both expressed in consciousness. 
Hence shoultl 
nwrds be etymologically divided r\s expressing actions or nominal cases. 
Otherwise how ~rould it be possible to construe a mord, a noun or a verb, 
when oue cannot be lrnomn from the other on account of external sirni- 
larity. For example, take the words Bhavati, Advah, Ajapbydh. 
The mords, the meaning and the idea of the sentence are distinct from 
4 
A 
each other. Thus svetate prasadnk (The mansion shines white) means an 
A 
A 
action. The words sretalt prasadah (A white mansion), signify a noun. 
Both forms of speech denote both a noun and an affirmation of s n  
action and also the meaning and the idea thereof. 
How ? By the cor- 
relation, ' this is that.' 
The notion puts on but one appearance, the 
same as tlie conventional sign. 
As to the white object, it is the support for 
both the word and the idea. It changes its state, but goes neither with the 
word nor with the idea. Such is a mord alld such an idea ; none goes with 
the other. 
Another is a word, another its meaning and anotller the 
idea. By performing Samyama in this way on their mutual distinction, a 
Yogi obtains knowledge of the sounds of all living beings.-123. 
V~CHASPATI'S GLOSS 
This is another subject for Sampama, here cliscussed :--' The word, the object nn.1 
the idea appear as one, because each coincides with the other ; by Samyama on their 
distinctions comes knowledge of the sounds of all liviog beings,' 
Here with the object of explaining the sound (verbal) which denotes a meaning, 
the commentator first mentions the province of the operation of the power of speech 
@K) . Now the power of speech, V l k ,  manifests literal sounds in eight places. As it is 
said :-g 
There are eight seats of literal sounds, the chest, t h e  throat, and the head, and 
also the root of the tongue, the teeth, thc nose, the lips and t h e  palate.' 
This VAK, the p o ~ w r  
of speech, is purposed to operate in literal sounds only, suoh 
as they have come into existence by the recognition of the world. It does not oper.lb 
$0 express the sign as suoh of a thing signified. This is the meaning. 
-- 

CR. III. 
ON ATTAINMENTS, 123, 
211 
- 
He ascertains the sp%ere of the operation of the power of hearing :--The auditory 
power, again, operates to change itself into the pnrticnlar form of a literal sound, which 
is a distinct lnodificntion of the manifested inarticulate sound striking against the organs 
, of speech. Its operation is limited to that much ; it does not ss such signify the thing 
signifiecl. This is the meaning. 
He distinguishes the verbal sign signifying an object as such, from literal sounds as 
they have come into esistence by the recognition of the world :--'A 
word, however, (that 
is to say, the sign signifying .a thing) is taken by the understanding all a t  once, having 
assumed a unified appearance, just as the last literal sound &sappcars.' 
Each of the 
literal sounds is first taken in according as the sonnc's are familiar to the world; and 
after they have been taken into the mind, they are brought together into n single mani- 
festation of consciousness, and thus as a sign signifying an object it is taken in by the 
understanding all at once. The single verbal sound ' cow ' is a word, and is taken in as 
such by the understanding. Although each of the preceding sounds of component letters 
tends to bring into the field of consciousness the sound of the whole verl~al sign, yet until 
the last literal souncl is added to the sound-image that is being formed, the whole is not 
nladc distinct and clear. When the last literal cognition has, howevcr, come into operation, 
tl~e 
entire sound-image constituting the word becomes clear. For this reason it is said 
that 'a. word is taken in by the understanding all a t  once, having assumed a unified 
4 .. 
appearance, just as the last literal sound ceases.' 
' Literal sonncls from the impossibility, &C.' 
This is said in reply to him who does no 
peco,anize on account of the distinctions obtaining among t h e  different classes of letters, 
that words are taken in as entire single concepts all a t  once, but establishes on the 
contrary that, the letters themselves singly have the power of signifying the object. 
It may be in one of two ways that the literal sounds may generate the mental 
impressioll of &c signified object as each is being pronounced as a part of a complete 
word. They may carry the capacity of signifyiog the object, each of them, either as pegs 
which give s~lpport to a basket hung therefrom ; (Thus whenever the peg goes, the basket 
would go too) or, they may give support to the llleaning as several stolles placed to,aether 
, 
and made itrto a platform give support to a stool. 
The first theory does not hold. The pronodncement of one letter only does not carry 
the object to the rniild, for if it did, the uttering of the other letters would bo quite useless. 
When a work has been completed, the employment of an effort for its achievement, such as 
is not calculated to give the completed work any extra cluality, would take the effort out 
of the category of the means of achievement. 
~f this does not hold, the other remains. It is certainly possible in this case, as 
not possible in t h e  case of many pegs placed separately, that stoncs ldaced together to 
ruake a single platform should hold a stool, because in this case the capacity of giving 
support to the stool is being employed a t  O d e  and the same time. Letters, however, can- 
not all be pronounced simultaneously, and for this reason they cannot carry the meaning to 
the mind even when brought together, because each of them does not take after the other, 
and the pronouncement of the one does not suggest the other. They do not attach to 
the form of one word only n s  if they were of its very nature. They, therefore, do not sug- 
gest the word, as each is being pronounced and passing into latency. Each maintains 
itself in separate and independent existence like a rod of steel. It is, therefore, said that 
each of them is not of t h e  nature of a word, 
Inasmuch as this defect would not arise, if the letters forming parts of a mord con- 
stituted as such the word itself, he says :-' Each letter, however, singly is a nec.esgary 
constituent of a word: it has the potentiality of supplying a name for all objects.' 
~ 1 1  
the potentialities of making all names are present in it. Thus the letter, a, is found to 

PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
exist in the words GAU, GANA, GAURA, NAGA, etc., which signify iliflerent ol$ects (a 
corn m d  others respectively). It has, therefore, the potency of supplyiug names for each 
and all of theho objects. Similarly is the lettor, O9 found in the words, SOMA, ~ O C H I ,  
etc., which means God and other things, and that too has, therefore, t!le capcity of 
naming all these objects. Similarly should it be understood everywhcrc clse. Each of 
these letters G, etc., appears in combination with, i. e., in contact with other conjoined 
letters, such as. 0, etc. On account of there bcing such contact, it becomes, as it were, 
of universal application, i. C., each of these letters becomes, at i t  were inany, and cbes 
not remain, as it is, one only. It does not of course, actually become many. Therefore 
thc words, ' as it ware,' have been added. The letter, of course, remains the same. 
The letter, G, placed before and the letter, 0, placed thereafter distinguish the 
consequent sonorous iu~prossion froa the words GBNA, c t c  Similarly docs the letter, 
B 
0, 
placed a: ter G, distinguish it from t h e  words nYOCBI, etc. A specific sonorous ilulmw 
sion is thus established in the mind as the succession of literal sounds appearing in t h  
word ceases. This specific . mental itnprcssion is the single image of the word, GAU, 
as manifested in the mind (sphota). It is this sonorous image that dpnotes the specific 
quality of the species COW. 
This is the meaning. It is impossible that the notion of an object be causcd by 
literal sounds on account of there being a fixed order of their succession in x word : 
because they do not come into existeuce simultaneously. Nor is it proper to hold that 
notmit~~staildin~ 
the order of tha succession of literal sounds iii a word being fixed they 
come together to manifestl the notiou of an object by t h e  operation of their residual 
poterrcics, in the same way as there is absence of antecedence and postcedonce in the 
purificatory potencies bro~lght about by oblations of combustil)les, etc. ; or in the same 
way as the heavenly state of esistcnce is brought abcut. This is so, because option is 
inadmissible, 
Knowledge of an object is not, therefore, caused by literal sounds. It is necessary 
that there should be perception of a single word as the means of calling it forth. 
This, however, is not the case with s word. A word is espresscd by sounds which 
differ from each other in the effort which is put forth in pronouncing them (prayatna), 
These constituent sounds which go to form this and that w'ord, each diBcri~~g 
from the 
other, are similar to each other in having their place of forunation in the month and the 
effort requisite for their pronouncement, always the same. For this reason tbcy make 
trp a word similar to t h e  others in some respect, although dissimilar in reality. The sirni- 
lrritiej here and there differ from each other by the cliZererlce caused by the relative 
positions of the letters. It is by this complscelnellt that words appear as possessing 
different parts and composite mtures, although in reaiity they are single and withoot 
parts. This happens in the same way as a face possessing a constmt tiagc of colour 
and fixed features and dimensions show more reflections than one, each possess& of 
different colour, dimensions and features, when placed differently with respect t o  a mirror, 
a dagger and a jewel. 
The difference is not real. 
A verbal sign is single and parbless. 
The letters are tnlrcn to be its parts by virtue 
of the difference of the contiguity of similar letters i n  different words. 
The difference 
of words being thns due to the conception of there being constituted by letters conceived 
as such a single and partless sonorous image (sphotaj. Having no distinctions in itself, 
it is kept up in the mind, as it were, distinct and possessed of parts. It is for this reason 
that the specific sonorous image of the word Gau is not deter mined by its part G, because 
therein it is aimilar to the sonorous imageo of such other words &S GAURA, etc. It, 
however, determines the whole verbal image when quelitied by the literal sound v. Simi- 
larly the letter 0 is not competent to determine the single whole, the sonorous image of 

CR. 111. 
ON ATTAINNEZVTS, 123. 
213 
by means of the s~tccessive starage of their rcsidual potel:cies. 
l'hus the notion of the 
existence of n tree at s distance is s t  first dim, bnt by and by becomes distinct. It is llot, 
hqwe~er, possible that this may bc the method of the litcral sorwds bri,l&ng about 
the perception of the oljject. Bec~nsc the rule of dirnricss ancl clearness applies only to 
perceptive cognitions ; and it is not by perceptions that literal sounds bring about the 
co~~sciousnes~ 
of an objectl. It cannot, of cotuse, be that each of the colistitne~lt literal 
clounds of a word should prodocc an indistinct image of the ohjcct whicll becomes distinct 
0111~ 
in the end. If the image is raised by the lctters i t  mu& be qaite distinct. Or, i t  
may be said that it is never born a t  all. It can ncver be said that i t  romsiw indistinct 
and dim (asphnte). The dissimilarity is that in the casc of t be smoroos irungc the distinct- 
ness and indisti i~ctness are fnncied after the perccptibilil g is established. Thus when 
the notion of the cessation of litcral sounds takes its phce in themind through t h e  audid 
tory sense, along with the residual potencies left thercin by the perception oi cach literal 
soulld in succession, the literal sounds come together into the manifested sonorous imge 
of a single word. This manifestation is brought about by a specific oiltpit of energy. 
Thc speciality uf this energy depends upon thc fixity of a particular order of the sue- 
cession of litcral sooncls. When, therefore, the order of the succession changes, the 
specific energy which is competent to bring about the part icvler verbal rnal~ifecjtat~ion 
no longer exists, and the particular manifestation is not brought about. Literal sounds 
are thus limited to the expression of a particular meaning by their dependence upon 
the order of their soccession. They, therefore, show the convcntiolml limitation ns it 
\ 
appears in the world, to be tho sphere of the operation of a word liaving more parts 
than one, 80 many as two, three, four, five or six literal sounds possessing the power 
of natnir~g all objects dcnotb the particular object which is possessed of udders, &C., 
.?hen they appear as G, AU alld t h e  aspirate 13. 
a 
Well, then, is it the letters alone which by virtne of distinct nrclers of succession 
denote an object ? Is not a mwcl indeyeucler~t of its consti f ucilt letters ? Eor this reason 
he says :---' 
Tlli~s a single word, &C'.' 
' The succcssion of literal sounds' is tbo-succession brought about by literal sound. 
l 
' The succession of literal sounds l i d  t'ed to a particular object ceases' : -Such 
are 
the letters of a word at the t i m e  when. tho successive pronoii~~ceu~cnt 
of the literal 
sounds is over. 
- 
' hLanifestation of conscio~.sness' mems the shinillg oiit of the Will-to-know (the 
budclhi) iu t h e  shape of a particular i m p .  
Limited to a particular convcntionai meaning' :-The liternl sounds limited to a 
particular conventional meaning are, ss has been s:ticl, t llo sounds of G, AU and H, in 
accordance with tho conceptions of sugerficial observers. The meaning is that G, &C., 
are also taken to be the sipifiers of an object, being as they are the parts of s word and 
thus its necessary constituents. In reality, however, it is a- sirlgle mental phenomenon 
which, as a word, signifies an object. He renders the same plainer :-' Thus a single word 

214 
PATANJA LI'S YOGA. 
l 
is a single manifestation of consciousness, &c. All this rclated to it is understood by the 
mind of the world, &C.' 
But why a single manifestation of consciousness ? For this reason he snyq :-' It is 
the object of n single effort of consciousness.' 
A cow : This single mord is the object of 
a single phenomenon of consciousness ; it is, therefore, spoken of as a single manifestation. 
He mentions t h e  cause of its i~~anifestation 
:-' lt is brought into existence by a 
single effort.' 
The effort which manifests the mord RAM is different from tho effort 
which manifests the word S ~ R A .  
And i t  is single, inasmuch as it is possessed of the 
qnality of the individnality of the nord RASA from t h e  beginning, is differentiated by 
t h e  fruit thereof, and has r determinate order of the antecedent and postcedent (literal 
sounds thereof). Thc diffemnt parts of the word which aye understood to be existing 
as sqch by cfiffercnces in similarity and order of contiipity, do not esist as such in reality, 
and a mord is, therefore, said to he without parts. For this reason it has no order, because 
tthere is no existence in it of parts which may exist either before or. after endh other., 
The question arises, that literal sounds appearing in order before and after oils 
another in !, word and being therefore its parts, how is it said under the circnrnsta~~ces 
thst a mord has no order and no parts ? For this reason he says :-' It is not a whole 
made of separate and distinct literal sounds.' 
Literal sonncls are not parts of a word ; 
but by means of differences in similarity ancl order of contiguity, the word pots on of 
itself different forms and appears na i t  is in reality. The faces appearing in a jewel, s 
dagger, a mirror, &C., are not parts of the real face. ' Jt is n manifestation of the Will-to- 
kllow (buddhi). This means thst the collective appearance at the cessation of a succession 
is known by t h e  ~tddhi, 
is found in the b~rddhi. The operation of the notion of the last 
literal soulld means the residual potency of t h e  cognition of that sonnd. This residual 
potency when it is thrown in with the residual potencies of the cognitions of the pro- 
violls literal 
brings the wl:ole word into consciousness, that is, renclerv it'to the 
object of cognition. And it is shown below that the residual potencies left 
the 
mind by the cognitions of sounds, coincide in space with the sphere of the word they 
make up. 
 ell ; but if a word has nb parts, no order and no constituent literal sounds, why 
does it never appear as such ? A whito crystal may appear to be red when besmeared 
with m o l t o ~  shellac but it is not that it will not appear pure white even when the 
colour has been removed. Literal sounds are, therefore, parts of a word. For this reason 
he says :-' It. is understood by the mind of the world, &a' The eternal functioning of the 
power of speech has gone on through t h e  articulation into words of different literal 
sounds. This has been carried on with t h e  help of literal sounds, separately named. 
uttered and heard by the hearers for the purpose of transferring them from one to other 
minds. Eternal habit is secured by the operation. 
' On account of eternal habit' means that the mind which has preceived thus, is 
possessed of the habit thus acquired ; the habit, that is to say, of understanding the whole 
ward as coloured by separate literal sounds. ' As having come iuto existence' (Yiddhavat) 
:{ 
meails L as it were, having a real and independent existence.' 
By ' conjunction of letters ' he means the speech of the older people which has always 
been so achieved. ' Thus is the word known.' The mcaning is this. There is a certain appli- 
cation (upldhi) which may either be applied to arything or separated from it. Take for 
example lac or something similar. If it is separated froln the crystal it shines out ih 
its whlte purity. This is proper. AS to the notion of a mord, however, it is never prodnc- 
ed except by a particular sound which is brol~ght about by a particulsr effort. Further 
a lvord is always marred by similarity, and its notion,is generated in the mind only as 
being made up of literal sounds. How then is it possible that z nord may also be spoken 

CR. III. 
ON ATTAINMENTS, 123. 
\ 
or known as pure and independent of literal sonnds? As they say :-'Sounds 
being 
similar in their nature becomes causes of wrong impressions. The cause of wrong im- 
pression takes them in as such ; in the sight of those who know the word, it is fixed 
with. reference to its mcans of production. This certain ao~ililsion in the world is but 
the contracliction of k~~owleclge.' Beceuss the body of a word shows itself as always 
maile up of articulated sonncls ; the world being superficial observers, believe that the 
literal  sound^ themselves are words ; and they think that the literal sonnd only appear- 
ing iil different combinations give different meanings. He says this :-' Distiiigcislled by 
conveilticnal meaning, etc.' 
Tile meaning is that for the benefit of tho ordinary mind to 
whom tlm real word is anlri~own ss such, n word is divided into literal sounds by m act 
of the mind which is called convention. He describes the division into article ~onnds :- 
' Of so many letters,' neither more nor less. 
' bnch and such a succession ' means one l~aving 
x particular orcler of uninterrupted 
9 
succession. 'Siiccession SO endi~~g,' 
is that which is taken in by a single act of the under- 
standing. He illustrates such and such ail object : -'Such 
as the genepiu quality of a 
COW, &C.' 
' Well ; but if convention means that n particular word is to denote a. particular object, 
the11 there is no confusion be twoell word and rnemi~~g. Por this reason he says :-' Con- 
ven tion, liowcver, &C.' 
C -  
' A rnnnifestatio~ of memory ' :-The esistlence of this convcntionrl relation is dae to 
the function of memory. Tlie convmtion which deterluines the meaning is n ~ t  
only this, 
that such and such a weaning llns been given to such and such a sound ; it is also that snch 
m d  such a soilnil is remembered as correlatcc. to snch and such R meaning. This is the 
pealling, 
.L 
' Whoever knows thcir distinction performs Samyarna thereon and thereby knows 
all,' that is, ~u~clc~stancls 
tho soi~nds of all living beings. The genitive case used. 'their 
clistinction ' is used only with refereime to convention in which the forms are not distinct. 
A word Imrs thus been establisliecl to be a single pnrtlesa and jointless output of 
sound in which the literal sounclo are only fancied to be articulations. Now he esbablishos 
thab a sentence also is a sit~gle complete notion in the mind and that the words are simply 
fallcied to be parts thereof. So he says :--' And in all words lives the power of z sentence.' 
?'his is the explanation. A word is used to convey information to another.. It is only what 
they are intended to convey that is conveycd to the other. The satne is intended to be 
collveyed by them which is the field of any action, &C., with reference to them. It is not 
the object alone that is signified by them, but the entire meaning of a sentence. All 
words are meant to complete the meaning of a complete sentence. Hence the same is their 
meaning. For this reason, where even a single word is used, even there the meaning is 
llllderstood to 
what it woulcl be, if it were used together with another word. 
The whole 
llleailing is not conveyed by one word alone. Why ? Because that such alone has not the 
power to conrcy the whole meaning. Therefore in such places it is tfie sentence alone 
tfhat conveys the meaning ilot the separstepords. Because however t1he words are parts 
of s sentence, they too lnvo the power of denoting the meaning of a sentence, in the 
same way as litcrol sotmds lnvo the power of conveying the lmaning of a word on 
account of appearing as articulations thereof. For this reason just as every literal 
sound is possessed of the power of forming all meaos, so every word also is as 
possessed of the power of forming all sentenccs and thus denoting the meaning intended 
to be conveyed by all sentences. This is what is inesnt by saying, '.And in all words 
lives the power of n sentence.' 
When some one says, ' A tree,' it is understood, that a 
tree exists. The word, ' treo,' togather with the word, 'is,' understood, give the mean- 
ing of n sentence, and hence t h e  word, tree, exists as part of a sentence. 

YOGA. 
But then how is it that tho word, is,' is understood? For this reason he says :-- 
The object signified by a word ni?vcr fails of esistcnce.' 
In the world, woPcls are the 
means of ascert2iniag the exist~llce of objects; and a word, always joining the object 
signifid to tho mord, ' is,' everynliere gives the menniug of o sei~tence. This is tho 
meaning of an object llever failing of csisteacc. It is for this reason the practice of 
thoso who know the usage of words, that whcrcrer ilinre is no other vqrb, $he word ' is ' 
ancl becomes ' are to be coi~siclered understood, ancl arc to be supplied. 
I 
Having described thc nornii~al bases as ncrer failiug of n particular action he now 
/ 
shows that, a partiaulrr-action aevor fails of a noun 1 -Thus 
on pronotwchg tllo woml 
' cooks ' the appropriate agents of tho actioll signified are always understood. Ancl tho 
mord excludes other inappropriate agcnts. Jt ia thus that t h e  mcnning of a scntencc is 
differentiated. 
Similarly are words foon3 existing ill a schtenee althongli tlldg are not required 
there : and for this reason a1-l thc more is it that words posscss tlw power of givi~lg t1i0 
mezzing of 
selltence, For this rc:ison he says :-' Then is also scell 
combination 
of ~vords in n sentence.' 
Not evon thus the words 'Vcdic student,' &C., I ! S C ~  i~~dcpeil- 
dentfly would cpn\Tey such a rnonnii~g if they were not understood as conjoined to 
the words is,' &a. Thus the rncmil~g is that tlhis too has hccn fa~lcioil to bc a part of a 
sentence. 
Let that be. But if the words themsclrcs have the power of conveying tllc ~ e a n i n p  
of a seiltence, there is no nsc of rnnlciug sell tonccs. 
The meaning iiitendcd to bo convcpd 
by ;I scntenco is convcycd by tlio worcls tl~cmselvcs. For this reason hc says :--'h a 
sentcnce like this, BC.' It ha4 1,ecn said that the meaning illtendcd to bo conveyed 
by a word ils not coweyed by a word alone, until i t  is conjoined to aqothcs worcl 
understoxl. Hence are words separC~ted from a sentence and fsucicd as separate fnom 
them ; and hence also are words scpnratecl fro111 the meaning of a scntcnce, and arc ' 
distinguished as either verbs or notuiiml bases. Thus are words t o  bc ctyrnologicnllg 
explained by introducing the divisions of cnscs. 
But thcn why should so mnch troclble be talie~l to csplnin thcm ? For this ri.nsol1 
he says :--' Otherwise how, etc. 
? 
I11 the sentence GNAT0 SHBVATT, 
BIIAVAT~ I 
JWlIl, UHAYAT~ 
l ,  
TISTHATI, the nouns and verbs appear to Lo similar iu c x t c r ~ ~ a l  
slinpc. The mord 
I31IAVATI in the first s c ~ h n c e  
is a verb ancl lnea 11s ' csists. 
111 t l ~ c  
o: her t:vo scntc.nccs 
it is a noon and might be translntcd as 'Your lnclgship. 9 
Similarly in the sentences, &astvain 
al~d Aivas Ysti, the formcr AJvas is D 
verb and means ' be appeased. ' The sccond R4vns is n noun and means a horse. 
Similarly in the sentences, A jLpaya!l Piva and h1 ,zmyijspn;yn C hat-rdn. In t]lc 
former sentence it means the milk of a she-goat, mll in the sccolld it ~ n c ~ n s  
' kill. ' 
Thus names and wrbs being silnilar in oxterm1 nplmwmcc, they \wn& 
not, be 
known as nouns and v e ~ h  
if they were not to be scpnrsted Prom the scntencc. Itow 
could they otherwise be oxplaiacd as either' verLs oia nominal bases ? Hellcc words 
should be separated from a scntelrce and explniped. It is not t h t ,  merely by thus 
explaining words after having taken them out of the sentcnce, they ~ o u l c l  
really become 
different in nature. 
Havii~g thus ascertninccl the nature of words, he now begins the discuss'lon of the 
absence of real confusion (sailkara) among W O P ~ ,  meaning and idea, upon which confusi~n 
has been fastened by convention : --' These arc the word, the ineaning and tlic idea 
among which ob hills rt distinction. ' 
Thus, &etate PrBsPdah, (white shines the mansion) n~eal~s 
an action. It is very 
  lain here that the action of looking white which has to bc established, comes first, 

CH. III. 
O N  ATTAINMENTS, 123, 124. 
# 
and then arises the consciousness of t h e  purpose of the action having been established. 
The word &eta ' is a separate thing. Even where t h e  word and rncsning liavo their 
forms established, there exists a difference hetwoon word and meaning. He says this :- 
kvetah PrBsMah iti' (the place is white). The word here has the meaning of a noun. 
Thc absence of the case-ending is because the word is intended tto express its own 
meaning. He divides thc meaning :-'l'hesc 
are words denoting both a noun and an 
action. The meaning of both those words is both of the nature of a noun and an action.' 
He divides the ides :--' And also the meaning and the idea thereof. ' It is the word ' CHA ' 
in the original which gives t h e  meaning of the words, ' the meaning of the idea thereof. ' - 
The relation shown here is with anothor object which is signified. 
l 
The question is that if word, meaning and notion ire known as single on account 
of confasion (sailbara, coming together) whence does the distinction come ? He puts 
tile questioil wit h this object :-' How ? ' IIe gives the answer :-' By the correlation, 
this is that, &C.' 
The mealling ie that the cause of thc notio~i of unity is the cpalification of the 
 onv vent ion ; it is not real, however. 
The use of words ' In the conventional sign* in 
the locative case shows that convuntioii. is the cause thereof. Be shows the reality:- 
' And the white object, &C.* 
The ' states ' are newness and oldness. ' Goes with ' means 
becomes confused. 
By performing Satilyama in this way with reference to the distinctions 
C -  
of word, 
mealling and idea, the sounds of all animals, insects, &C., become distinctly intelligible to 
the Yogi. The Samyama performed with respect to the speech of man is eclonlly performed 
with rosgect to their sounds also, inasmuch as both are of the same class. The Yogi knows 
their different sounds, their different meanings and their notrions. Thus is i t  proved.-17. 

218 
PATAXJALI'S YOGA. 
Residual potencies are two-fold,-those 
appearing as habits and 
causing memories and afflictions ; and those appearing as virtue ancl 
vice and causing fruition. Tl~ese are the unconscious characteristics of 
the mind-change (pnrin8rna), activity (chest&!, suppression (nirodha), 
ideation in action (dalrti), physical life (Jlrana), characterization (dharma), 
now appearing along with them as they have been poten tialized in 
L 
previous births. Samyama orer these has the power of achieving the 
direct knowledge of the r e d  ual potencies. 
And their direct 'knowledge 
is not possible without the lrnomledge of space, time and operative 
cause. Thus is it that a Yogi brings into conscious~iess the previous 
life-states by obtaining direct lrnowledge of residual potencies. Similarly 
is obtnined the ltnowledge of the life-states of others by obtaining direct 
knowledge of their residual potencies. 
The following story is heard in this connection :-Bhagavbn 
Jai- 
gifavya obtained the knowleclge of the distinction between the real and 
the unreal after he had seen the direct succession of live-cllanges during 
ten great creations by having obtained direct lcnowledge of his residual 
potencies. The holy Avafya, having taken a body asked him : ' You 
have lived and thereby become chastened tltrougli ten Great Kalpas. 
The essence of your Will-to-know has not been overpowered. You have 
experienced the troubles of life in hells, among animals ancl in wombs. 
You have been born again and again among men and gods. Have you 
tllrough all this life experienced the greater quantity of pleasure or of 
pain,-which 
? 
Jaigisava replied to BhagavBn Avatpa :-' I bare lived through 
ten great creations. 
My mental essence has not been overpomered. 
1 have experienced the troubles of hell 'and ani~nal life. I have been born 
again and again among men and gods. I consider all that 1 hsve ex- 
perienced as pain only. 9 
Said the revered .&raty a :-' This mastery of your reverence over the 
the First Cause and this invaluable joy of contentment of yours,-do 
yon 
place these too tc the credit of pain? 
The revered Jaigikavya said --' The joy of con ten tment is invalu- 
able only in comparison with the pleasures or sensation. Compared to 

CB. III. 
ON ATTAINMENTS, 125, 124. 
219 
the bliss of absolute freedom (Kaivalva) 
V 
it ia pain only. 
The possession 
of the three qualities ia of the nature of the essence of the Will-to-know 
and whatever is gosaessed of the three qoal ities 1s thrown to the side of 
avoidable pain. 
The chain oE desire is of the nature of pain. It has been 
said that when tile anxiety of the pain of desire is removed, then comes 
+ 
joy, calm, undistnrbed;all-embraci tlg. '-121. 
The residual potencies born of cognitions are t h e  causes of mernorie~. The potencies 
of Nesctienco, &C., are the causes of the fruition of the affictions of Ncscience, c 
Frui- 
tion has the form of life-state, life-experience and life-period. The causes have the forms 
of virtue and vice. 
' lWxmtialized in previous births ' :-Brought 
about their causes in previous life- 
states. The charac toristics of the mind are change, aqtivi ty, suppression, active ideation, 
physical life and characterization. Like them are these potelitializations too unconscious. 
The characieristics have baen heard about and inferred. Samya~ua performed over these 
along with their sub-heads has the power of producini the direct knowledge of both the 
residual potencies. 
*S 
Well ; if this be so, tlie two residual potencies may be directJy known. But how 
can the previous life-states be known in this way? For this rcason the Commentator 
says :-' .4nd their direct knowledge is not possible without the ktiowlcdge of space, time 
and operative cause. ' 0per.rtive cause is the former body and the organs of the powers 
of sensation and action. The meaning is that the bno wlcdgo of the residual potencies 
together with the circumstal~ces of their fruition, is not different at all froln the direct 
knowledge of life-state, &c. Now he s a y  that tho Samyamz over one's own potencies 
applies to others also :- ' Similarly is obtained the knowledge, &c. 
9 
For the purpose of creating faith in this he relates the story of the dialogue between 
the revered Avatys and Jaigigavya :-' The following story, &c. ' The great Kalpa is 
the Grzat Creation. 
' Having taken s body' :-This* means possessed of the glory of a Nirmilnlrilya. 
'Chastened ' denotes the state from which the dirt of Rajas ancl 'i'amas has been romoved 
' Mastery over the First ~auso"is godhead It is by the posscssion of that, that he 
sets thc Pradltina, the First Caase, into motion and gives to whomsoever he pleases such 
pourers of body and sense as h3 wishes ; and haviug made for himseX thousands of bodies 
and powers he goes about as he pleases in heaven, midheeven and earth. 
Contentment is the destruction of desire, the characteristic of calmness of Bhe 
essence of the Will-to-be. 
Shtra xg 
Pratyayasya, of the notions. 
W Para, of other (minds). 
Chitta, of 
minds. wry Jfilnam, knowledge. 
19. Of the notions, the lrnowledge of other mincls -125. 

220 
PATANJA LI'S YOGA. 
- 
By Samyama over the notions and tlius by obtailiing the direct 
knowledge of the notions, comes the kuowledge of other minds. 
But not 
of its object, that not being the direct object of the Yogi's mind. He 
lmom the mental emotion of love, but does not know the object of love. 
Because that which has been the object of the other man's mind has not 
been the object of the Yogi's mind. It is only the other's mental state 
that has beeu the object of the Yogi's Saqlyama. 
~HCHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Of the notions, the knowleclge of other minds. 
Because the mind of the other only becomes directly known, the notion only is 
known. 
A s  the direct knowledge of the potencies brings about the bnowledgc of the previous 
life-states also, by causing the direct L-nowledge of tllc enuironments, so also ib follows 
that when the mind of another is know11, the object which is respousible for the existence 
of aoy particular state of the mind sliould also bccomc known. This b e i q  the sugges- 
tion, the ~omment~ato~ 
says : - ' Bat not along with its object. ' Thc former Sal? yama 
was with reference to all the environn~ents : this is wit h reference to the mind of the 
other only. This is the ineaniag. 
SQtra 2 0 .  
m Khya, of the body. m Raps, over the form. m, Samyanliit, by Sayyama. 
q Tad, that (form). m Crilhya, capable of receiving (that). 
ialcti, the power. 
Tad Grbhya dakti, Of perpeptibility. ~4 Stambhe, on the checking of. m: 
W 
Chak~uh, of the eye. m Yrakhda, with the light. 
Asamprayoge, there 
being no contact. 
Antardhbnam, disappearance. 
20. By S a ~ y a m a  over the form of the body, on per- 
ceptibility being checkecl, and thus there being no-con tact 
with the light of the eye, comes disappearance.-136. 
. 
By Samyama orer the form of the body, he checks the perceptibility 
of the form. On perceptibility being checked, and thus there no longer 
being 
- 
co~~tact 
with the !ight which carries it to the eye, disappearance 
of the Yogi is brought about. By this the cessation of the perception of 
sound, &C., must be understood as explained.-126. 

C .  III. 
ON ATTAINMENTS, 126, 127. 
221 
*By Samyama over t h e  form of the body, on perceptibility being checked, and thus 
there being no contact with 'thr light of the eye, comes disappearance.' 
The body is made'of the five tattvas. It becomes an object of pwception to the eye 
on account of its yossessio~l of colour (for form). It is hy colour that the body and its 
form becomes objects of perception. When the Yogi performs Sainyama with reference 
to the formof the body, then is chccked the operation of the perceptibility of colour, 
which is responsible for cansing t h e  ocular i~erccptiocl of the body. For this reason 
when the po ner of being porceived is chscltcd, the Yogi is no longer visible. Thereby 
the light of sensation which is born in the oyc of mother, does not come into contact 
with the body that has disappeared. The meaning is that the body of the Yogi does not 
become the object of the other's knowledge. Disappearance is to he brought about when i t  
is desired that the Yogi should not he semi by anybody. By this should also be under- 
stood another aphorism to thc following elIect : -By S~loyarna over the sotulds, touches, 
tastes, smells of tllc body, their perceptibility bcing chccked, there is no contact with 
the tympanum, skin, tongue and nose ; ancl hence these disappear. 
%WIPI~ 
Sopalcramam, fast in fruition. hwmqNirnpakramam, slow. V Cha, and, 
or. %if Karma, action, Karma. K? Tat, over these. 
Samyamht, by S a m y a ~ .  
Apar$nta, of death. a y  Jfibmun, the knowledge. &$W: 
Ari~tebhyaw by 
portents. 
V$, or. 
3 
\ 
21. Karma is either fast-in-fruition or slow ; by 
Samyama over these comes ltnowledge of death; or, by 

a met piece of cloth, well ~prencl, dries in a sllort time. &milady the 
fast-in-frui tion. 
The same cloth wlleii gathered up, however, will take a long time 
to dry. Sinlilar is the slow-in-frui t ion. 
Further fire, thrown into dry hay a d  acco~npaniecl by wild in 
everv 
W direction, burns it in a short time ; such is the f;~st-in-fruition. 
The same fire, however, applied to detached pieces of straw out of a heap, 
burns them in a very lol~g time. 
Similarly the slow-in-fruition. 
Thus the o~te-birth Karma mh.icll is responsible for the period of 
life is two-foid, the fas t-i n-frnititm and the slow-in-frui tion. 
By Sarpyama 
orer these comes the knowledge of death, the smaller end of life. 
) 
' Or, by the portents :-A 
portent is three-fold :---Personal ( ? d l ~ '  
ybtinikaj, alenlental Cicll~i bhaut i h) ant1 tlivi ne (fi dhidaivilta). Of these, 
the personal.:--He 
hears not the sotmd in his own body on stopping the 
passage of the ears. He sees aat the light in the eyes on pressing them. 
And the ele~neiltal :-He 
sees the messengers of Yams. He sees 
suddenly ancl without thonght the ancestors that have passed away. 
Similarly the divine :-He 
sees the heavenly worltls and the Siddhau 
suddenly. Or, he 'sees everything contrary to what he has been seeing 
the whole of his life. 
It is by the,% that a*170gi may optionally know the proximity of 
death. 
V~CHAHPATI'S GLOSS. 
' Karma is either fast-in-fruition or d o  w ; by Ssolyo~na over tllese comes the know- 
ledge of death ; or, by portents.' 
The Karma which fruc tifics into life-time is t WO-fold, the fast-in-frui tiori mitt the 
slow-in-fruition. The one-birth Karma cert:~i:lly which is the caiise of Iif'c-tirnc, Iifc-state 
ancl life-experience, f ructifies into life-period The Cast-fructify iiig Karma is that which 
is going on fructifyiug without any reference to w1,n.t litno it may take to fillis11 b ~ -  
csclsi~ia 
experience, of which more has beell over mid :l little only r~ini~ins, 
whoso opcratioli is 
going on but whose froitage is impossible to ciijoy cluril~g life by olke l~ody alld which, 
therefore, delays t h ~  
Yogi, keepiog him iu tho I~onclnge of births, 
The same when but a sm:111 portion of the fruit has bcon enjoyed m d  which is operat- 
izlg to produce the remaining fmit with rcfercncu to  lie t i m e  that has been taken by 
the eiljoyment of the past, wvorks but slo~vly and, llow aud thcl~, is slow to froctify. 
The Commentator' renders this plain by two illustrations :-' As for example.' 
He 
gives an illustration to rendor tile s a m  plainer still : -' Or, as fire.' 
The words ' slualler ellcl of life ' (apar8nta) mean death hvith reference to the Great 
Latency which is the ultimate end. By Samyama over that Karma, that is, over virtue 
and vice, accrues the knowleJge of dcath. By this the Yogi knows his fast-fr~~ctif~'ing 
Karma, and then makes maily bodies for himself and thereby enjoys the fruit thereof as 
fast as h e  likes and dies whenever he pleases. 
Ilo takes up the context :-' Or by portents.' 
The indications are three-fold. They 
are called portents (ariqtas), because they frighten like an enemy. 

C
.
 III. 
Oh7 A TTA ZNIIIEXTS, 127, 128. 
223 
I 
' Or sees eberythillg contrnl*~., 
&C.' :--?'his ~ r ~ l ~ i d c s  
t h e  trick of jugglers. lht other- 
wise he begii~s to see 11envc.n in rilhrgcs and t o ~ ~ n s ;  
ltc begins to sue also that t h e  world 
of mcn only is the u-orld of gods. - 21'. 
Maitri fidif;u, over Erimdliners, &c. 
Ralrini, the powers. 
22. 
Over frienclliness, &C , the powers.--1 2s. 
of compassion by habi tnnt i i ~ g  the mind to compassion towards sufferers. 
T 
L
-
 gets the power of complaisance by habituating tllle mind to corn- 
trance m h i r h  is Samjnmn. Tllrreby are bol*n the powers which know 
of no obstacle in their worlting. 
i~obit~unl 
~olit~ion. I-Icllce there is 110 trmce here ; and hence by reason of 
P, 
t11el.e being no Smnyma, tlwe is no ]sou-er of indifference. -1 28. 
VACHASPA ?'l's G LOSS. 
' Orer f~irlldlil?css, 
&C., t llc pol~crs.' I:y the ~~crforrnance 
of Sarnynma oyer friendli- 
ness, &C., the poncrs of fricndliiress, &C., come to him. Of thcsc the power which comes 
by tile 11'ccticc of the iceling of flbiencllincss, is that by which he can m a k e  tile whole 
litring uorld hsppy, and hellcc becomes t h e   ell-wisher of sll. 
Similarly, by the power of compassion he lifts soflerjng crcntorcs out of pain and t h e  
causes of pain. 
Sirnilarlj, by tlm power of conlplaisal~ce hc becomes just to all the world. 
Now the Corcmcntutor describes that thc c o 1 ~ 4 o ~ s  
practice of llabituatillg volition 
is bllc cause of trancc, as this will be of use further. 
By conscious habituating volition cones trance hie11 is Satnynmn.' 
Although Saruysms means concentration, meditation atld trance, and not only trancc, 
still bccaasc trance is their immediate effect aid is, therefore, the chief of the three, there- 
fore ihc word is used here as applying to the snmc. 
In some places the reading is - 
Conscious hali tuatilrg volition is trance.' There conscious habituating volition and 
t r a i ~ c  
\vo~~lcl 
becomc the eauscs, i. e., the limbs of Samyama taken as whole. 
Power (virya) is effort. For this reason the man who possesses the power of friendli- 
ness, &C., puts forth an effort t o  render people happy, &C., aud his eflort is not checked. 

PATANJA LI'S YOGA. 
Indifference, however, means absence of effort. There can be no volition with respect to 
that; nor does there exist anyt'lling such as happiness, &C., 
which tnight thereby be 
brought into existence.--22. 
Stitra 23. 
Balesu, over the powers. 
F% Hasti;elephants. 
W Raln, power. 
V 
Adini, and the others. 
23. Over the powers, the powers of elephant, &C.-129, 
By Samyama with reference to the strength 01 an elephant he comes 
to possess the strength of a11 elephnn t. 
By Salnyama over' the power of the king of birds, one gets the 
power of the king of birds. 
By :'a~yarns over the powers of Viiyu, one gets the power of VLyu 
-1 29. 
Over the powers, the powers of elephant*, &c. He gets the strel~gth of w h ~ w m w  
he performs Sa~yama over. -23. 
Sfit1-a 24. 
PravrittyBb, of the lligller sense-activity. h Lolin, of the light. 
m Ky~siit, by the directing. 
VR 
P\ 
SBksmn, of the subtler. dim Vyavahitn, of 
the veiled. b
e
 
Viprakristn, 
.. of the remote. 
Jfi$nam, the knowledge. 
24. The knowledge of the subtle, the veiled, the 
remote, by directing the light of higher sense-ac tivity to- 
The higher sense-activity of lucidity has been described. It is that 
higher sight which the Yogi's mind directs towards the subtle, the veiled 
or the remote and thereby lrnows the object.-130. 
V~~CHASPATI~S 
GLOSS. 
Throwing that sight by Samyama over the subtle, the veiled and the remote, the 
Yogi thereby knows the object.-24. 

ca. m. 
F - ~ T  Bhuvana-Jiihatn, the knowledge of the regions. fj! Sfirye, on the 
sun. 
Samyanllit, by Samyama. 
. C 
25. By 
S 
Samrama 
. cl 
on the sun, knowledge of the 

PATAKJALT'S YOQA. 
; F T ~ w ~ ~ :  
I giip~&mbfppar. W T ~ %  
Tqrm: 3 ; r a M ~ q  &m4a;- 
~;aw%mtm 
%a*~r 
m h* -et 
~ R V X  
am- 
Fiimr 1 Tm -B: 
ul;jr?~~: 
ST&UTTIT 
@h ~ ? q ~ & 6 b  --
: 
~ c m m g y :  
I a& ~&IT 
m&% ~
~
&
%
 
+&rn4r arwghear 
W R d h T  W
V
?
m
 
3 W C T  F& 
I # @&W&& 
@T 
f~ga- 
I r " t  m& 
R b k  $&wQ: 
I armm R g w r a n :  
h 
~
~
g
r
s
r
~
~
'
 
T& 
I a @ ~ s & % E P ~ ~ T  
&wi&*~nga: d 
W ~ W T  
=$am m~mRr9amr au~qhwqnm- 
tawf: I q?m aarrm: fli~2Tik rmtr 
@€ti%%rw 
u=331: ~ z , m m :  
- 
5iwlw: 
I wgmT4qmr: 
3Pg"d?km: msf- 
m33*p: I ?T5rT=Jar: ~
~
~
~
;
~
;
a
w
:
 
g~aaarm: 
W b m -  
k m v g w r :  atmwr anqmm~nffwr: &&rRmgafinmnrrn~~iil~'~
+t& %WWI* 
I a & w m ~ :  
wawm: I f~amftr 
l 
smqg ttvqve &Ht I& ;r 31- 
v h f t f t i l r  wqmmAhq I U$- 
. 
art Bwi 
ahsmft I & am~darafte 
aii' g&Rr 
11 
11 
VYASA. 
Their detail :-There 
are seven regions. 
Of these beginning from 
Avichi up to the back of the Meru, is the region called Bhur. 
Beginning from the back of the Meru up to the pole-star adorned 
with planets, asterisms and stare, is the starry region, the BntarPksa. 
Beyond this is the region Svar, llaving five planes. 
The third is 
Mahendra ; the fourth is the Maharloka of! the lords of creation ; after 
this is the three-fold Brahma region. These are the Janaloka, the Tapololra 
and the Satyalbka. 
L First comes khho triple plane 
Of Brshrnii's region high ; 
Creation's lord0 have then 
Their region ; and then, 
Cometh Indra's region- 
Know all these aa Heaven ; 
Then come the stars above, 
And the last cometh Bhur.' 
This verse puts all these together. 
Then up to the Avichij one placed above the other, are the six great 
bells, the MahBkQla (l), tho AmbarPga (2), the Raurava (3), the Mahbrau- 
ram (41, the IC4lasGtra (5), and the Andhatllvisra (6), in which are the 
excesses of earth, sir, fire, likhda, aud darkness respective1 y. Here are 
born beings who are to euffer from the consequences of their stored 
up Karma 
't 

CR. III. 
O N  ATTAINMENTS, 131. 
; 
Then are the seven PAtBlas, the nether worlds, Sutalla, Vitda, Talzi- 
tala, JIahiMa, RasAtala, Atala and PAtila. 
The eighth is this earth, having seven dvPp~s and known as Va- 
sumati. In t l ~ e  
rniddle thereof is the golden king of mountains, the 
Sumern. Its peaks are of silver, coral, crystal, gold ancl pearl. Here, 
blue l ilre the leaf of the blue lotus, on account of tlie sheen of the emerald, 
is the southern region of the heavens ; the eastem is white, the wester8n 
bright, and the northern yellow. 
And on its right side is the Jambu (tree), whence is this called tho 
Jan~buclvipa. Its night and day take their ronnd of existence from 
the motion of the sun. 
This has three northern mountain chains having blue and white 
peaks. Their length is 2,000 yojanas. Surrounded by these mo~nt~ains 
are three continents, 9,000 yojanas each. They are Ramanaka, Hiranmaya, 
and Uttarskuru. 
C . 
To the south are the three mountatn chains, Nisbda, Hemakiita, 
and Hernadrihgn, 2,000 yojanas in extensiou each. Among these are 
continents, Harivar~a, Kimpnrnsa and Bhbrats. 
The eastern regions 
of Bumeru are bounded by Bhadrbdn and Malayavat, the western by 
Ice trrmbla and Gnndhambdana. 
In the rniddle is the continent of Ilffvrita. 
All this is one hundred 
thousand yojanas of Snmeru, each side being,half that dimension. 
It is to be known that this ~arnbudvf~a 
is 100,000 yojanas in di- 
mension. It is surroanded by double its extent of salt ocean. 
Each twice as large as the preceding one are the other dvipas : #aka, 
Kuda, I<rauiicl~a, Slillnala, Comedha, and Pusknra. So are the seven 
oceans. There are beautiful mountains looking like mustard seed. The 
seven oceans which surround these like bracelets, taste as sugar-cane, 
mine, clarified butter, curds, gruel ancl milk (besides the salt one). They 
reach u p  to ille real horizon. 
They measure fifty croree of yojanas 
(500,000,000). All this is well arranged in the sphere of phenomenal 
wor-ltl. 
Here t,hen in the P$titlas, the oceans and the' mountains are the habi- 
tations of the elcmentals. 
The astrras, gandharvas, the kinnaws, yakgas, 
. I  A 
~.&.gasos, hhiita 5, pretas, ptstcchas, apasma rakas, apmras, brahmardk- 
fagrs, klumtlndas? and vindyakas, live there. 
In the dvipas live good men and gods. Sumera is the garden of 
the gods. 
The gardens are Midravana Nandana, Chai triiratha, and 
Sumbnnsa. Sutll~armrZ is the council of the gods. Sudarkna is their 
city ; Vaijayanta their palace. 

Above the Sumeru is the astral region, in which the planets, aster- 
isms ancl stars move round, the pole-star, carried on in their courses by 
certain motive forces (VByus). 
111 the ilInllendraloka lice six classes of devas, the tricladas, agnisvh t- 
tfis, ytim yas, tugi tas, aparanirmi tavadavnrtinas, and parinirrni tavadavarti- 
nas. All of them have the pomer of fulfilment of desires by mere thoughts, 
and are possessed of the attainments known Aqima, &c. Their life-times 
are measured by a ICnl pa. They are very beautiful. They c11 j oy their desires. 
Their bodies come into existence ~vithout parents, by the mere force of 
their good actions. They have good and obedient nymphs in tlleir families. 
In the great PIS jGpa ty a. regions there are five descriptions of gods ; 
Kumudas, Ribbus, Pratardams, AiijaniLbl~as, and Praclli tli bhas. They 
lla?-e the Mahiibhiitas in their pomer. 
Con templatiou is their foocl. They 
live on for a thousand Kalpas. 
In the the first sphere of BrahmG, the Jal~alolra, there are four classes of 
eods, the Brahmapuro!r i tas, tbe Brahmak5yikas, the Bral~mamail~~t~yilras, 
h 
and the An~aras. They have pomer over the elements and the powers of 
sensation and action. Each lives twice as long as the preceding one. 
Tn the second, the Tapoloka, there are three classes o[ gods, tile 
Abhcsva ras, the 
bi&waraa, and the Satyamal&svaras. 
'They have 
power over the source of elements and powers, the tanm,'ltr,zs. Eacll 
lives twice as long as the preceding one. 
All of them are nourished by contemplation. Their knowledge is 
f
'
 
not checked in the region above them. 
h e r e  is nothing which is hidden 
from them on the lower planes. 
In the third sphere oE BrahmL, the Satgaloko, live four classes of 
gods, the Achy u tas, the SuddllanivBsa, the Snty5 bhris and the SamjiiBsamj- 
Ginas. They do not build habitations. They live in thernselves, one 
above the other. 
They 1m-e their pomer over the MQlaprakyiti. They 
live on till the end of creations. 
Of these, the Achyu tas enjoy the bliss of 
the Indistinctive trance (savitarka samgdhi) ; the Suddhanivhs enjoy 
the bliss of the Meditative trance. The Sstydbhiis revel in pure bliss, 
(bnanda). The Samj fibsamj fiinas are happy in the Egoisti~ trance. They 
live within the three regions (triloki). 
These are the seven regions including the Brahmalokas. The Vi- 
&has and tile Pal~~itilayns 
have reached the state of quasi-freedom, they 
have therefore not been placed in the phenomenal world. 
All this, the yet unseen, the Yogi must see by performing Sanpyama 
over the solar entrance and thewe over the connected objects. 
Let him 
practise until all becomes clear.-131. 

CR. ITI. 
ON ATTAINMENTS, 131. 
229 
- 
I 
VACHASPATI~S GLOSS. 
Knowledge of the regions by Sarnyama over the sun.' 
First, the Commentator describes the seven regions briefly up to the end of the verse 
which puts them together. Then he takes up in detailed description :-' Then up from 
Avichi, etc.' 
The word ' ghana ' is used for Prithivi (earth). These great regions are to 
bo understood as having many sub-divisions. He gives their other names :-g 
The Mall& 
ksla, &C.' ' Its night ancl day take their round of existence from the motion of the sun.' 
Whichever portion the sun' leaves, there is night. Whichever thesun adorns there is 
day. 
He gives the dimensions of the whole of the Jambudvigs. This is a hundred thou- 
sand yojanas. How is this hundred tho~lsand arranged ? Half of it, that is fifty thousand, 
is placecl on either side of the MePu, It is for this reason that the Meru is the middle 
thereof. The oceans are twice each. They are like heaps of inustard seed. A s  the 
heap of mustard seed is neither above the ground like a heap of barley, nor yet level 
with the surface of the earth, so are the oceans also. They are adorned by mountains 
as with ornaments. Such are the dvipas. All this sphere of the earth is very well arrang- 
ed in the body of Hrahml's Egg together with the seven dvipas and all -its forests and 
mountains, cities, oceans, which surround it like a necklace. 
Now he shows who live there in different places :--' Here then in the P#itdlas, &C.' 
He mentions the arrangement of the Gumeru :-' Sumeru is the garden of the gods.' 
Having described t,he Blmrlolra mith its various details, he now describes t h e  An- 
tarik+aloka as well mith details :--' Above the Sumeru is t h e  astral region, &c,' 
' Operation of motive forces,' means the wcrking of the forces. 
He describes the heaven world :--' In the Mahendra lolm, &C.' 
l 
Clagses of gods' means species of gods.. He describes the highest of powers of all 
, 
the six :-G 
All of them have the power of fulfilment, &C.' 
Desirable objects come to them 
by the mere force of wishing for them. They aro very beautiful, adorable. 
L They enjoy 
their desires :' This means tlhat they are fond of the sex-passion. 
He describes the Maharloka :-' In the great, &C.' 
' They have the MahiibhQtas in 
their power.' 
Whatever they like, the Mahgbhdtas supply them with. The Mahfibhatas 
take this and that form in obedience to and in accordance with their wishes. 
' Contemplation is their food ' :-They 
are satisfied by mere contemplation and grow 
t8F.ereb 
y . 
He describes the Janaloka :-' In the first of the Brahmalokas, &C.' ' They have power 
over tho elements and the powers of sensation, &C.' 
The elements are the Prithvi, &a. 
k 
The powers are the senses of hearing, &c. Howsoever they desire to employ these, they 
do so employ them. 
Following the order of the above descriptioil he now t dies up Lfic second region of 
Brahmh :--' In the seconcl, &C., they have power over the source, &C.' 
Tllo source is the 
five tanmiitras. They have power over them. 
The &mis say that by their wish the 
tanmatras take the form of any bocly they desire. 
' Each lives twice as much as t h e  preceding ~n~':-Thc ~ h h f d ~ h k w s r a s  
hare twice 
the limit of t h e  age of the AbhBsvaras ; the Sat~amahBsraras h a w  double thoir age. 
/ 
This is the meaning. 
'Pheir knowledge is not cllecked in tho region above them ':-'Above ' means in tile 
Satyaloka. Brom the Avichi 1 
to the Tapaloks whatever is there of the subtle and 
f 
remote, they know. 
He describes the third region of Brabmii, the Satyaloka :-a 
In t h e  third fiphcre of 
l 
&&m$, 
&C.' 
' They do not build habitations, houses.' 
Because they have no place where 
$0 support themselves, they live in tliemsclvcs independent of any support in space, 

230 
P A T A A 7 J ~ ~ 1 ' s  
YOGA. 
-- 
They have power over the Mdlzprakyiti. The three qualities, the sattva, the Rajas and 
the Tamas, function in aocorrlanoe with their wishes. They live up to the end of creation. 
And so it is heard :--Having reached tho performance of a function similar to that of 
Brahma, their spirits are prepared for that, and they accordingly reach the highost state. 
Baving described the generic function of the gods, he now takes their names and 
deaoribes the specific functions of each :-' Of thcse the hohyutss, &C.' 
The gods named 
Achyutas derive their happilioss by the contemplation of gross objects. They arc satis- 
fied thereby. The gods lrnown as SuddhanivBsinas find happiness in tho contemplation 
of subtle objects ; they are pleased thereby. The gods named Saty&hhBs derive happiness 
from the contemplation of the objectq of the senses. The Samj CPsamj fiinan derive their 
happiness from the contemplation of egoism alone, and are pleased thereby. All these 
take up the Cognitive trance. 
Why are the performers of tho ultra-cognitive trance, the Videhas and the Pralryiti- 
layas, not placed within thc lobas ? Thosc whoso Will-to-bo is ahtive and shows objects 
t o  the Puru!a, carry on the c-iolution of! the miverse and are, therefore, within the world. 
Not so the Tidehas and the l'rak~itilayas, even though their minds have still their duty 
to fulfil. All this up to tlm Satyrloka and down to the Avfchi, the Yogi should know 
in the solar entraoce, i. e., the tube called 5uyumn8. 
Even by this much all is not known. For this reason he says :-' And thence on other 
objects Lesidos the 8uprnn5; whcrevcr the teacher of Yoga points out? until all t h h  
world becomes visible.' 
The essence of the Will-to-know i i  by its very nature possessed of t h e  power of illu- 
minating the universe. Being however covered by darkness it illiminates only those 
regions from which the cover is removed by Rajas. When the solar entrance is uncovered, 
the regions are illuminated. This rule does not apply elsewhere. Tllo Saroyama per- 
formed elsewhere has only the power of unveiling as much of the Luddhic essence, as the 
Bamyama is performed with reference to. Thus all is plain.-%. 
+ Ohandre, on the mcon. m 7'&ra, of the htars, starry. v Vyilha, of the 
aye terns. m Jfilnam, the knowledge. 
26. On the moon, t,he knowledge of the starry 
Let him know the starry systems by performing Samyama nit11 refer- 
ence to the moon.-132. 
*P 
W Dhruve, on the pole-star. 
Tad, . 
of their. 6% Gati, movement. m 
JR&nam, the knowledge. 
the pole-star the knowledge 
men ts.-133. 
their move- 

CH. IN. 
ON ATTBIT\7MENTS, 134, 135, 136. 
231 
U$ aq?~Rmnq 
I a?h u3 &mi im 
qf?i H m q  
I ad- 
ftqmUari 
s
~
(
 
mi? ka&aT II ?* II 
Then let him Itnow the movements of the stars bp performing Saw- 
ysma. wi tll reference to \ the pole-star.--1 33. 
T% Niibhi, of the navel. 8% Chakre, on the plexus. W K&p, of the body. 
9 VyQha, of the system. m, JfiLnam, the knowledge. 
28. On the plexus of the nevel, the lcnowledge 
of the system of the body.-134. 
wiha6i wmgarsrq I mfYa% &wi m 
fh?twq, I 
8 m ~ ~ q ~ ~ r n ~ I ~  
: 
I Yraa: ?m ~
~
d
i
r
~
;
l
m
f
w
c
~
w
+- 
- l 
6 $m W
W
~
B
 
#m3 II PC II 
vubsa. 
Let him know the system of the body by performing Salpyama over 
the plexus of the navel. 
There are thee humours, gas, bile and phlegm. 
There are seven substances, skin, blood, n~uscle, tendon, bone, fat and 
semen. The previous in order among these is external to the next follow- 
ing. Such is their comparative position.-134. 
Ka~tha, of the throat. @ Kfipe, in the pit. F 
W Ksut, of hunger. M 
Pipbsb, thirst. M: 
Nivdt tib, the aubdual. 
29. In the pit of the throat, snbdual of hunger 
and thirst.-135. 
wm@ arRm@@%: 
Q 
I &gm flumm1mad~s9~ 
l, ' 
H i i m l  Efmp$% 
0 
1 c W G m  m 
l1 W l1 
VYASA. 
Below the tongue is the throat ; below that the gullet ; below that 
the pit (stomach). By Samyama there, hunger and thiyt tease not.--135. 
SGtra 30. 
IR;hmrcl 
a 
Kfirma-nbdyBm, tortoise tube, 4i4q Sthairyam, ateadiness. 
30. 
O p  the tortoise tube (kurmaniidi), steadipess.-136. 

?@m 
mshiqonurif 
Below the 
By performance 
I qptqw ER& 
&it m x t r r a w  
hur 
11 30 11 
VYASA, 
throat pit in the chest is a tube of the shape of a tortoise. 
over that, the Yogi gets firmness of position as that of 
snake, alligator, &c. (i.e., the power of hibernation).-1 36. 
VA CHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
26,27,28,29 and 30. 
Whatever t h e  Yogi wishes to itnqw, he must perform Satpyama with reference to that. 
Thus Sarpyarna tending to bring about tllo cessation of hunger and thirst and steadiness 
have been taught by the word3 of the aphorism and have been explained by the words of 
the Corolneutary already explained.--30. 
Sfitra 31. 
$ Murdha, of the head, the coronal. oGFrF;r Jyotigi, on the light 4 Siddha, 
of the perfected ones. qh, Darsanam, the vision. 
31. In the corona1 light, vision of the Perfectecl- 
In the skull there is a b r i d t  
E 
light it1 the hole. By S a ~ y s l n a  there- 
c 
upon comes vision of the perfected ones, the Sidcllliis, moving iu space 
between earth and heaven.--137. 
V&HASPATI'S 
GLOSS. 
By the word ooroosl' the SupnnS tube is indicated. The Sarnyama is to be there.--3 l. 
PrPti $bd, by prescience. 
W V@, or. &, Sarvam, all. 
32. Or, all knowledge by prescience (priitibha).-138. 
VYASA. 
Prescience is also named Tliraka. It is the fore-runner of discrimi- 
native knowledge, as light is the fore-rwmer of the sun at sunrise. The 
Yogi :inay also know everything by that, (as an alternative means) after 
the birth of knowledge, called prescience.-138, 
I 
r 
3, 

I 
VBCHASPATI~P 
GLOSS. 
Prbtibha, prescience, is the same as sellsuggestion (Uha), the coming into consoious- 
ness without external aid of any thing unknom;~. When 8au1 yama is performed with the 
object of attaining the Highest Intellection, then at the time of the height of practice, 
there takes its rise a power which, as it were, draws in all knowledge. The Yogi knows 
everything by that. It is called TPraka, (from tri to swim, to cross over), because by 
bringing about the Highest Intellection it helpsin crossing over the world of life and 
death.-32. 
Sdtra 33. 
g@ Hyitlaye, in t>he heart.. h Chitta, of the mind. m Bamvit, the know- 
ledge. 
33. In the heart, the I~nowleclge 
C 
of the mind.-139. 
In the l~tus-like cavity, the temple in the city of BrahmB, lives the 
\ 
V~~CHASPATI~S 
GLOSS. 
The Commentator describes the word Heart (H~idaya). The self is called Brahma, 
being largest of ail. His city is that in which he is honsed, knowing it as hr does to bc 
his own. Cavity means h0110~. The same is the lotus too with its face downwards. f he 
same is the temple. 
He gives the reason for the mind knowing mind (the Manas knowing the Chitta): 
6Intelligenco lives there.' By Sanyama over that, the Yogi kllows the Chitta with its 
modifications.-83. 
Sfitra 34. 
riw Sattva, of the objective essence. F: 
Purwayob, and of the Purusr. 
m A tyanta, quite, ..aw$cim: AsahlcPrpayoh, distinct from each other. m 
Prat jays, 
the notion of distinction. m: 
AviQe~ab, 
the absence. h: 
Hhogab, is experience. 
w h q  Pariirthatviit, because it exists for another. 
Svhtha, on his own 
object. m, Samyambt, by Sayyarna. 
Puru~a-Jfibnam, the knowledge of 
the Purusa. 
34. Experience consists in 
the absence of 
the 
notion of dis tine tion between the Puruga and 0 bj ec tive- 
Essence, which are really quite clistinc t-from-each-other, 
39 

231 
PATANJAW'S YOGA. 
- 
because it exists for another. By Samyama on his own , 
object, comes the knowledge of the Purusa- 140. 
- 
Tlle essence of the Will-to-be is of the nature of illurnination ; and 
when it overpowers the clualities of Disturbing energy (Rajas) and Inertia 
(Tamas), which are eqnally related to it by CO-existeuce, it takes up the 
form of the notion of the distinction between the Puriqa and Objective 
Essence. Widely different from that changing Objec tive Existence also 
in characteristic is the Purusa who appears as pure consciousness. TheS 
are quite distinct from each other. Experience consists in the notions of 
the two not being taken as distinct, because the objects are shown to him. 
The notion of enjoyment is the knowable, becanse the Esser~ce of matter 
exists for another. There is another notion, however, the notion of the 
Pmuga, which is quite distinct from this, and which appears as pure 
consciousness. 
By Samyama with reference to this notion is horn the knowledge 
of the Purusa. The Puruaa is not kwmn by that notion of itself, which 
is the self-same as the Objective Buddhi. The Purusa only sees that 
notion of self by himself. 
And so it has been said :-' By what, Oh ! is 
the knomer to be known ?-140. 
When the Essence of the Will-to-be, which is of the very nature of the luminous 
essence of things, which is extremely pure, and which is on account of the utter suppres- 
sion of the Rajas and Tamas modified into the phenomenon of the distinction between the 
Parusa and the Objective Essence, is entirely different from the Puru?a, what to speak of 
the Rajas and the Tamas? It is with this in his mind that the author of the aphorisms 
says, Distinction between the Purusa and the Objective Essence.' 
the same in mind the author of the Commentary too says :--'The essence 
of the Will-to-be, &C.' 
Not onIy possessing the nature of illumination, but modified too at 
the same t i m e  as the discriminative knowledge, and therefore extremely pure and lumin- 
ous, it therefore bears extreme resemblance to consciousness. ,This mould mean confusion. 

cn. 111. 
ON ATTATNMENTS, MO. 
- 
2% 
For t h b  Feseon he says :--' Which are equally related to it by co*exisknca' k x i s t e n o e  
is the relation of ono not eriatil-,g without the other. Those M c h  bear the relation ol 
CO-existence equally, are t h e  qvielities of Jlisturbing Energy (Rajas) and Ine~tia (Tarn-), 
' Overpworing ' meaw con trolling. He describes the absence of confusion :-' Widely 
different from the Ctangiug Objective, &c*' 
The word rlso' signifies that it is not only different from the b t t v r ,  bM. from the 
Rpjae and Tsmrs *\do. ' Changing Objective exi&euos ' is used to indioate the dirrbinotion 
of the unchanging Purnga. 
' The notion ol these two not being taken ss distinctive':-The Wilt-to-be ia of the 
nature of eiLher the quieecont, the disturbed, or the forgetful notions. When conscioue- 
nese is ~eaected 
into it, then tho quiescence, the disturbance and the lorgotfulness am 
fasten6 on to the conscionsnees. (This happens in the eame way) as f he moon refleo- 
into pmre water, looks aa if trembling on a~count of the unsteadiness of the water. 
He msntions the canse of experience :-'Becaufie 
the objects are shown to the 
Pump.' This harl been explained often. 
Well; let the essence of the Will-to-be different from the Purugo. But how OM 
e~perienoe be different from the Pump ? For this reason he rays :-g 
The notion ot 
enjoyrncnt,' 
e., the notion consisting of enjoyment, ' is of the Objective Essenoe and 
Eherefore existing for the eako of anothor. 
All thak is enjoyable is of the nature of the 
knowable. Objective Essence is for t h e  sake of another, because it corkists of many 
things brought together ; and bocauso experience is a hhawcterirtic. That rlso is tor the 
sake of another. It becomes the enjoyable of that psrticuhr 
- 
enjoyer for whose sake so- 
ever it may be in existence. 
it is this that constitutes experience. The self is tho ~njoyer; the 
which he enjoys. 
Which is qnite distinct Prom this': -The 
words ' on account of 
sake of another9 are to be supplied here as nndemtood to explain the d 
Or, iQ may be eaid that experience is the feeling of pleasure and pain as being in 
consonance or dissonance with the prevajling mental trend a t  any time. This cannot be 
in consonance or dissonance wit h itself. No self-cont~adic 
tory manifestation can exist in 
itself. Hence it must be the objcats that are either in consonance or dissonance ; and 
knowable is that 
existence for the 
istinc tion. 
Well let that be. But if the Puruga is thus the object of knowledge, then there 
muat be posited another intelligence, which this intelligence knows, m d  so on and on 
md fhus there would be no fitability of' thought. For this reason he says :-' Tho Purnga 
ia not known by that notion of itsslf, &C! 
This is the conetrnction : The non-intelligeat 
Is illuminated by consoiouaness, not cons%iousness by the non-intelligent. How could the 
notion o l  the Purusa (being non-intelligent, as being a modi0cation of the Will-to-be 
illuminate the conscious self 4 It has, however, been said that the conscions self, not 
I 
depending fat illnmination upcm another, illuminates the non-intelligent. By saying that 
the ~ 4 i i o n  
of the Purqa is of t h e  nature of the essence of' the Will-&be, it is meant to be 
abated that i b  is of tho nature of the non-intelligent, and is therefore unconacioue as such. 
What looks like the objective appearance of the Puruga, and becomes a s  such an object of 
knowledge, is the refleation of the Puruga into the essence of the Will-to-be. This reflec- 
tion depende upon the P U P U ~  
aa t h e  reflection of the face into the mirror depenh apon 
the face. The Will-to-be becomes the object of the Puru?a by that reflection and not in 
ib own nature of illumination. 'Ithe notion of self-knowledge consists in making the 
object of knowledge, the zeflaction of t h e  Purnp into the Buddhi. He illustrates the 
same bp a Vedic text (Br. Up. 11. 4-14 :- ) ' And so it has been eaid ' by h a r a  :-a 
By 
what Oh ! ie the knower to be known ?' 
That is, by nothing.--34. 

. 
I 
' ! 
': 
236 
PATANJALT'S YOGA. 
m: Tat&, thence. 
m%: 
PNtihha, prescience. 
Rrhvaga, higher 
hearing. 
Vedana, higher touch. 
W$ 
Adaria, higher vision. W- Asvbda, 
higher taste. 
amf Vartb, higher smell. w d  Jtiyante, proceed. 
35. Thence proceed prescience, higher hearing, 
touch, vision, taste, and smell.-141. 
By prescience comes the knowledge of the subtle, the intercepted, 
the remote and the past and future. 
By higher hearing comes the 
hearing of divine sounds; by toucl~, the itnowledge of divine touch ; by 
vision comes the knorvleclge oE heavenly colour ; by smell, the cognitiou of 
higher odours ; by taste comes the cognition of divirle tastes. 
These are 
born constantly. -141. 
V ~ H A S P A T I ' S  GLOSS. 
Samyama over self-illumination is impossible until the Pradhlna has fulfilled its 
object of making the whole of herself known to the Puru.qa. Therefore, the author shows 
all the attainments which precede it :-' Thence proceed prescience, higher hearing, 
to:wh, vision, taste, and smell.' By this it is also said that mind, hearing, skin, eye, 
' 
tongue and nose favourably strcngthened with thc virtues result,illg from tlle practice of 
Yoga, are the invisible causes respectively of prescience and higher hearing, &c. 
The words hr,&vana, &C., used in the text are technical terms for denoting the 
hearing oi divine souuds, &c. The Commentaty.is easy.-35. 
SGtra 36 
a Te, tlley. & Samiidhau, to trance. M: Upasargfb, obstacles. 
Vyutthbne, to the outgoing of the mind. W: Siddlmyab, ~erfections. 
36, They are obstacles to trance, but perfections 
to the out-going mind.-142. 
%'hey, the powers of prescience, &C., prove to be obstacles when they 
appear in a mind which has reached the state of trance; because they 
oppose the knowledge obtained in that state. 
When, however, they 
appear in a mind which is active in going out, they are attainments.-142. 

self, loay on the appearance cf these attai~iments think that he has achieved what had to 
be achieved, and thus give up further effort, the author says :-'They 
are obstacles to 
trance, but perfections to the out-going nlincl.' 
It is only he whose mind is active in going out that becomes proud of tho possession 
of these as attainments. A beggar in life may think that the possession of a little wealth 
is the fulness of riches. The Yogi, however, who is inclined to the attainment of trance 
must reject t h e m  whenever they come. He has vowed the removal of all -the three 
descriptions of pain to their utmost limit. That being the object of the Purqa, how can 
/ 
he take pleasure in the attainmmts which arc t h e  opponents of that state of being? ' 
Tllis is the meaning of the aphorism and the commentary.- 36. 
9 
4 ? ~  
Bandha, 01 bondage. 
1<8m0a, of the canse.' 3- 
&ithily8t, on 
relaxation. m Y sac11 Ara, of the passages 
'a*? 
SamvedanBt, by I knowledge. 
Cha, and. kfp Ohit,tasya, of the mind. 
m Parn, other's. 
a* A. 
Rarira, body. 
d o :  Aved:lb, entering into. 
37. The mind m,ay enter another body, on relaxation 
of the cause of bondage, and by knowledge of the passages 
of the rninc1.-143. 
v YASA. 
The mind (chitta) which by nature passes into. new states of life 
and never. remains fixed in one state, is bound down to, i.e., comes to 
stay in a body, because of the power of the vehicle of actiou. 
By the 
. 
f-l*ce oE 
trance, the vehicle of action which chains it down, slackens 
its operation. And the corisciousi~ess of llow the mind acts in the body 
is also the fruit of torawe. By the destruction of the bonds imposed by 
Xanna, and by ltriowing the luethod of the mind acting upon the body, 
tlle Yogi withdraws llis mind frolu his ornu body and throws it into the 
body df another. As the mind is thus thrown illto another body, the 
powers of sensation, BC., follow it. 
Even as bees follow their king, as 
he goes on resting or moving on, so do the powers follow the mind as it 
enters another body.- 143. 

PATAWJA~Z'S YOQA. 
V ~ ~ C B A B B A T I ~ ~  
GLOW. 
Havine described tbe po+rer of knowledge, which haa its aulmination in the know- 
ledge of the Puruga, m being the result of Sapyama, the author now desctribee tbe rmmlt 
of L%myama which takeg the shape of the power of action :--' The mind may enter an- 
other body on relaxation of the csnse ~f-bondage, 
and by knowledge ot the passag- of the 
mind.' ' By the W
e
 
of trance ':-This 
meaae the performance of Say yamr on the cause 
of bondage* Trrnce alone is mentioned because that is the pdnuipal factor of the three. 
By 'passages of the mind' are understood the passag= through which and the modes 
acoordiug to which the mind acts in the body. Them are nervee in the body by whioh the 
mind travels in the body to porform its lonctiona. 
From the performance of E)plpyama 
on the pasbap of the mind along these nerves, accrues the consoiowness thereof, which 
slackens the bond. Then by destruction of the cause of bonds@ he no longer mmah 
confined to th8 body. But it m y  be tnrt even though be may no longer. be conflnod to 
the body, he may not know how to get out of the body by the propcl passago, and he may 
thw not be able to go out of the body withant Injury, and may not also bo nple to anter 
another body. For this reason the ptbssapecr and modes of movement also must be knotm. 
As the powers of eensation, b., fullow the mind they take thew pmpcz pisoea in the 
body, as the mind enters therein.--$?. 
SQtra $L 
q m  Udlna, over Udhnn. 
Jay& by mastery. as Jala, water. of 
Pabka, mud. mm Kaptnka, thorns, with theflc$. WQ 
Adiliu, and with the 
others. m: Aan~gah, non-contact. m d k  Utkrhtib, osceneion. v Chr, and. 
38. By mastery over UDANA, ascension 'and non- 
contact with water, mud, thorns, &c=--144. 
m m k n ? = u ~ * : ~
Q 
m 
?rt C t v  
91 v 1 
VYASA. 
Life which shows itself as the operations of I 
and others, is 
the manifestation of all the powers of sensation and action. Its'action is 
five-fold. The Pdea moves thmagh % the inot~th and the nose, and inani- 
Tests itself within the chest. 
TheSamlEnammifestsup to the navel. It is M, called because 
it carries equally (Samai (to all parts of the body, the juice of food, &c). 
Manifesting down to the soles of feeet (all over) is the Apba, eo called 
because it carries away (apa). Manifesting up to tlre head is'the UdBna, 
so called became it carries upward (ut). The VyELna is 80 called because 
the whole body in every direction. OF these, tire Praga is 
it pervades 
tbe chief. 

CH. III. 
Oh7 ATTAINMENTS, 145. 
239 
' By mastery over U d h a  is secured non-contact with  vate er, mud, 
thorns, &C., and ascension comes at the time of death. He secures that 
because he h a s  the power.'--144. 
a,+ .h 
V~~CHASPATI'S 
GLOSS. 
By mastery over Udbna is secured non-contact with water, mud, thorns, &c. 
g J,ife 
is the manifestation of tlic functions of all the powers of sensation, &C.' 
It functions as 
Prl~la, &c. Prlna, and others are indications thereof. The f~mctioning of the indriyas 
is two-fold, external and internal. The external is indicated by t h e  cognition of 
colonr, &c. The internal function is lift.. It is a particular effort, which is the 
common property of all the ii~clrijas (powers of action and seiisation) and the caose of 
the different actions of the Vlyu Tattva, the motivc power of the body. 
As the7 say :- 
' P P & ? ~  
and other motive forces, the functions of t h e  Vdya Tattva, are the five modifica- 
tions of the Vayu Tattva. They are the five modifications of t h e  Indriyas (powers of 
action md sensation) in common. Because they point to this that ' its action is five-fold,' 
the action of that effort (praystna) is five-fold. 
The Pr@a has its sphere from the fore-part of the nose clown to the heart. The 
BarnAna is that which carries equally, that is, to places where it is properly required and 
inasmuch as is required, the chyle which is made of foods and drinks. Its sphere of action 
is down from the heart to the navel. The bpdna is the cause of sending . ~ u t  of the body 
urine, f m e s ,  fcetus, &c. Its sphere of action is u p  to the navel and also down to the 
soles of feet. The U d h a  is so called because i t  carries up way& chyle, &c. Its function 
is from the fore-part of the nose up t o  the head. The VyLna is all-pervading. The PrQa 
is the chief of all these that have been described, bccaose t h e  Vedic text speaks of all 
these going out when Pr5t.m goes out. 
Having thus described the differences of P~b!m, &C., with reference to their func- 
tions and the places of their location, the Coa~ncntator now introduces t h e  aphorism :-- 
' By mastery over Udina, &C.' 
Khen U d h a  is mastered 11~- tlm performance of Samyarna 
thereupon? he is no longer checked by water, &c. 
As to ascension, that take3 plaw l)y the path which has its beginning in the flame 
(the Archiriidi, northern path), after ,death. Haviug mastered that path, he ascends by 
that path. 
Er the performance orer Pr%na, &C., and by the acquirement of mastery over these, 
come appropriate attainments too. 
They should be understood according to the dif- 
ferences ~JI' 
their function, place of manifestation, and mastery, etc.-38. 
SOtra 39. 
FisTWfirtiTdTR 113811 
\ 
m SamCina, over Samtins. v Jaybt, by mastery. 
Jvalanam, 
effulgence. 
30. By mastery over Samiina comes effulgence.--145. 
flrm51qmw?q l h
m
e
m
 
m71r;i ga? 
1 3\ 
11 
VYASA. 
He who has obtained mastery over the SainPna blows the fire into 
flame and thus shines.--145. 
V~~CHASPATI~S 
GLO.SS. 
The fire in of the M y .  The blowing it into flame means rendering it brighter.-8% 

240 
P ~ T A N J A L I ' S  YOGA. 
% drotra, the power of 
- hearil~g. 
Altiiia, 
i 
a- 
Sambandha, over the relation. -9 
Samyamfit, 
higher. 
Srotram, power of hearing. 
\ 
A ~ r ~ b a  
between these two. 
by &qyama. ftaFq Divyam, 
- 
40. By Samvllma 
. 
a/ 
over the relation between ~ k b s a  
ancl the power-of-hearing, comes the higher pomer-of- 
hearing.-146. 
V Y ~ S A .  
I n  h d a a h i d e  all pomersof hearing and all sounds. As has beeu 
said :-' To all those whose organs of hearing are similarly situated, the 
situation of hearing comes to be the same. 
9 
And this is a reason for (the existence of l
)
 
Absenco of ob- 
struction also has beenso spoken of. The &ida 
is also described as all- 
T 
pervading, seeing that there is absence of obstruction in other places also 
than where a form may he. 
The power of hearing is the means of perceivi~~g 
sound. Of a deaf 
and a not-deaf, one senses sound and the other does not. Therefore, the 
power of hearing only is the sphere for the action of sound. U'hoerer 
performs Samyama with reference to the relation between the power of 
hearing and the Aksda, evolves the polver of higher audition.-146. 
~ACHASPATI'S OLOS8. 
It has been said that the power of higher audition comes to the Yogi who is per- 
forming Sa~pgama with referencu to the purpose of the self, because there yet remains 
something of the Pradl~ina to be seen. Now the author says that the powers of higher 
audition and other sense powers come by the performance of Sa~pgarna with reference to 
the powers theinsclves :- 
'By f3a1iyama on the relation between the polver of hearing and iikiiia (the soni- 
ferous other) comes the higher power of auditioi~.' He describes the sphere of Sam- 
yama :-l The relation between the power of hearing and Akiida,' the relation being that 
of the thiug supporting and the bhing supported. 
All powers of hearing, even though they have their origin in tho principle of 
egoism, reside in the ;\k&ss, 
in the hoilow of tllc ear. It is this where the power 
of hearing is located. When soundness or defect is noticed therein, soundness or defect, 
as the case may be, is noticed in the power of hearing also. 

m. 111. 
ON ATTAINMENTS, 146. 
241 
I 
Further, when of the soxnds working in unison with the power of hearing, the 
sounds of 'solids, &C., are to be tabell in, then the power of hearing located in the hollow 
of the ear, stands in need of the capacity of resonance residing in the substratum, tho 
d k ~ b a  
of the ear. 
In the perception of the external smells of solids, &C., by t h e  senses of smell, be., 
working in unison with the qualities of odour, &C., the opei*ation is seen to be that the 
senses of smell, taste, touch, sight and hearing are located in physical vehicles only, 
because the powers of smell, &C., are seen to be working souidp or defectively when 
the physical vehicles are sound or injured respectively. 
This sense of hearing then, having its origin in the principal of egoism, acts like 
iron, drawn as it is by sound originating and locatcd ill t h e  mouth ot' the speaker, 
acting as loadstone, transforms them into its own modifications in sequence of the sounds 
of the speaker, and thus senses tljp. And it is for this reason that for every living 
creature, the perception of cound in external spacc is in the absence of defects, never 
void of authority. So says the quotation from Palicl~asiklla :-' To all those whose organs 
of hearing are similarly situated, the situation of hearing is the same.' 
All those are 
Chaitras and other organs of hearing are similarly situated in space. The meaning is 
that the powers of hearing of all arc located in Bkas'a. Further the Ali~ia in which the 
power of hearing is located is born out of the suniferous Tnnmitra, an$-has therefore 
the quality of sound inherent in itself. It is by this sound acting in unison that it takes 
tho sounds of external solids, QC. 
Hence the hearing, i.c., the sound of all is of the 
same class. (The class is determined by the relative situation in space). 
This then establishes that the B W a  is t h e  substratum of the power of hearing, 
and also possesses quality of sound. And this Sameness of the situation of sound is an 
indication of the existence of i k l ~ a .  That which is the snbstratnm of the auditory power 
(druti) which manifests as sound of the same class, is i k ~ ~ a .  
Such a manifestation of 
sound cannot be without such an auditory power. Nor is such an auditory power a quali- 
ty of P~ithvi, 
&C., because it cannot be in its own self both the manifester and manifested 
(vyangya and vyaiijaka). 
I 
Burther the absence of obstruction is an indication of dkiiia. If there were no 
&k&&a, 
the forms would be in such close contact with one another that even s needle- 
point would not find room between them. Everything would thus be obstructed by 
everything. It cannot be said that the absence of obstruction is the result only of the 
non-existence of things possessed of form, because non-existence depends upon existence, 
inasmuch as there can be no cessation of existence in the absence of existence. Fur- 
l1 . ther the power of consciousness cannot be its substratum, because it is immutable and 
cabnot, therefore, be limited. And further space and time, &C., are nothing different from 
the Ppithvi and other substances. Therefore such a kind of change can only be of the 
HkiGa. Thus all is plain. 
When it is shown that absence of obstruction is an indication of the existence of 
Aka&, then it is clear that wherever absence of obstruction is found, there must be 
Ak&ia in existence, and hence the dkiiia is proved to be all-pervading also. Bor this 
reason, the Commentator says :-G 
Therefore although having no form, &C.' 
He mentions authority for the existence of the power of hearing :mb The power of 
hearing is the means, Lc.' 
Action is found to be capable of performance by mean8 of an 
instrument only. As a hole can be made by a gimlet only, so here too the action of hear- 
ing sound can only be performed by means of some instrument only. Whatever is $he 
instrument of hearing, is the power of hearing. Rut then why should not the eye and 
other organs be the instruments of hearing also ? For this reason he says:--' A deaf 
tnd a notdeaf, &a.' 
The proof is given by the canons of agreement and difference both. 

PATANJA LI'S YOGA. 
Further this is suggestive of other powers. By Samyams over the relations between 
the skin andJLyu, the eye and the light, the taste and the Apns, the nose and Ppithvi, 
the attainment of the higher powers of touch, &C., is also to bc understood.-40. 
d: 
KhylkbPayob, between the body (m) and tthe BkiirSa. 
q
m
 
Sam- 
bandha, over ths relatiou. h. 
Samyarnbt, by Samyama. 
KQ Laghu, light. 
p TQls, cotton. &: 
Sambpatteh, by attaining to. 
T Cha, and. m¶ 
Alrbh, 
through space. 
Gamanam, passage. 
41. By Samyama on the relation between the body 
and the Akiika, or by attaining to (the state of thought 
transforming as) the lightness of cotton, c
,
 passage 
through space (~k&sa).--147. 
Wherever there is the body, there is tl'e AMda. The body becomes 
related to the Akiida, because the latter gives room to the former. Having 
mastered the relation by the attainment of the state of thought transform- 
ing into light things such as cotton, &C., clown to the atom, the Yogi be- 
comes light. Thence does he get the power of roaming through space 
and walking over water with his feet. He walks over a spider's web, 
and then walks over the rays of light. Then does he get the power of 
roaming through space at will.--147. 
fi 
By performance of Ssrpyama on the rel.ation between the body and the Aka<&, or 
having attained by Sa~yama on cottoll, &ca, the state of the mind transforming itself as 
such, it becomes the cause of manifesting the qualities present therein. The Commentator 
mentions the stage of the attainments :-' Moves over water, &C.'--41. 
Ifi: Bahib, actual passing out. 
i~$il~~pin 
Akalpitd, outaside the body. e: 
viittib, acting. 
NahlvidehL, the great ex-corporeal. m: Tatab, by that. 
n 
1 
arps Prak&, of light. 
Avarapa, of the veil. 
W: Ksayab, the destruction. 

CH. III. 
ON ATTAINMENTS, 148. 
243 
42. 
Actual-passing-out and acting outside the body 
is the Great Excorporeal ; by that is destroyed the veil 
m 
mwsr;hai sgR$gfft% I WT ~ ~ f t n o m h ~ f k  
Mq: 
I 
am=r yrwra: a n w &  ~~~~~~ q q a d  $mi&R~lzmi wttlh@ 
3- a 
waitr I1 us II 
V Y ~ A .  
That form of concentration in which the mind acts upon something 
outside the body, is ~mrned excorporeal concentration . 
This excorporeal concentration, if taking place by merely the mind 
functioning, while yet staying in the body, is called Fancied (kalpita) 
Excorporeal. 
That, however, in mllich the mind has no need of the body left and 
passes out of the body alld then functions outside the body, is called the 
Actual Excorporeal concentration. 
Of these, the Actnal Excorporeal, which is also called the Great 
Excorporeal, is attained by means of the Fancied Excorporeal. It is by 
this that the Y9gh effect their entrance into other bodies. By this concen- 
tration the veil of the luminous essence of the Will-to-be, in the shape 
of the three vehicles of affliction, action and fruition, which has its origin 
in the Rajas and Tarnas, is destroyed .-148. 
V~CHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
The author describes another Salpyama too, which becomes the means of entering 
into another body, and also the weans of destruction of afflictions, actions and fruitions :- 
'Actual passing out of the body and then acting there, ii the Great Excorporeal ; by this 
t,he veil of light is destroyed.' 
The Commentator describes the Excorporeal :--' That form of concentration in which 
the mind functions outside the body, &c! In order tc describe the nature of the 
Actual Excorporeal and for explaining its means, he describes the Fancied Excorporeal :- 
'If that, &c! 
' By merely the mind functioning outside the body.' 
Bancy means that the 
presence outside the body has been fancied, although the mind is still in the body and has 
been acting outside only functionally and not by actual presence. 
He describes the Great Excorporeal :-' That however.' 
NOW he says that the rela- 
tion between the Fancied and the Actual Excorporeal is that the former is the means of 
attaining the other.' ' By that con~entration.'-By 
means of that concentration the 
mental modification of the Great Excorporeal is achieved. The afflictions, the actions and 
the three-fold fruition thereof in the shape of lifestate, life-time and life-experience have 
all their origin in the Rajas and the Tamas ; because when the Rajas and the Tamas are 

244 
PATA NJALI'S YOGA. 
destroyed, the manifesbationO the discrimination takes place by the quality of essentb 
ality (Sattva) alone. This threefold fruition having its origin in the Rajas and the Tsmas, 
is of their nature and covers the essence of the Will to-be therewith. Ic is destroyed with 
its destruction, and the mind of the Yogi goes about at mill and similarly knows als0.--42~ 
SQtra 43. 
isa 
A 
SthBla, the gross. 
Svarttpa, the substantive. 
a 
SQksma, the 
astral. 
Anvaya, conj unctioa. 
whm Arthavattva, purposefulnese. 
S'sryyarnbd, by bqyama. F-PJI: 
BhCita-jayab, mastery over tho elements. 
43. By Samyama on the gross (sthQla), the substan- 
tive (svarhpa), the astral (sfiksma), conjunction (anvaya) 
and purposefulness (arthavattva), is obtained mastery over 

CH. III. 
ON ATTAINMENTS, 149. 
 he second appearance ie that which is common to the others too. 
The Prithvi lms forma, the Apm smoothness, the Tejos heat, the V ~ y u  
impulsion, the Akilrla motiorl in every direction. This is denoted by the- 
word subs tan tive appearance (svar Qpa), sounds, touclles, taetes, coloura 
are the specific ~nanifestatione of these common qualities. And 60 it has 
been said :-' Them manifested together in one species manifest their own 
distinguishing characteristics.' A group of the generic and specific quali- 
tie8 is here considered a substance (dravyrr). 
A group ia ol two description& The first is that in tvl~icll the d i e  
tinctin oof individuala disappears in t e whole, . such as the body, 
P 
the tree, the herd, the forest. The second is where the word shows tbe 
distinction between different indi~~idunls 
of the same group, as for exam- 
ple, a group of both gods and men. Of this group the gods are one 
portion, and the men the other. Both make one group. 
Tn this the 
di~tinctiotl of individuals may or may not be mentioned.; as in. a grove 
of mangoes, a crowd of Br1Shmsqae ; a mangm grove, the Brbhmans class. 
This again is of two descriptions ; where the pars of the whole 
are separate from each other and where they are not. 
A forest and a 
class are groups m l m e  the parts are separate from each other. 
A 
body, a treo, an atoy 
_A 
-
,
 are 811 groups whose parts are not separable 
from each other 
Substauce, according to Patafijeli, i~ a group whose 
parts are not meant to be distinguished from each other, and cannot be 
separated from each other. This Bae been called tho etlmric or substan- 
tive appearance (svari'ipa). 
And now what is their subtle appearance ? It is the TanlnBtra (the 
setral atom), the cause of the elemente. The atom is one part thereof. 
It is s group, a composite substance, which consist3 of 
generic and 
specific qualities, and whose parta are not distinguished from each other, 
and which cannot be separatod from one rrnotlier. All the Tanrnbtrb 
are similar to this. This is the third appearance of the elements. 
Now as to the hurt h appearance of the elements. These are the 
' qualities ' whose characteristics are essence, activity and inertia, and 
which follow the nature of effecte. These are denoted by the word 
conjunction (anvaya). 
And now the 6 fth appearance of purposefulness (arthsvattve). 
The purpse oE experience and ernancipetion is apparent in conj unction 
\ 
with the qualities. The qualities are to be found in TanmOtrBe, in the 
elementa and in tlinga made of elements. Hence all these are full of 
purpose. Now by Samyama over the five elementcr, with their five 

246 
MTANJALT'S 
YOGA. 
appearances, the nature of every appearance over which Satgyama is 
performed, becomes apparent and conquest over itl is obtained. Having 
obtained conquest over the five appearances he becomes the Lord of ele- 
ments. The powers 06 the elements begin by this conquest to follow his 
thought, as the cows follow their calves. -149. 
V~EIASPATI'S 
GLOSS. 
C 
' By Samyama on gross, the substant ivo appearance, tho subtle, the conjunc- 
tion and purposefulness, is obtained mastery over elements.' JIastery is obtained by 
sarpyama over each separately, the gross, the substantive, the subtle, t h e  coi~jur~ction 
and purposeful~~ess. The Commentator describes the gross : -' The word SthClla here, &C.' 
The sounds, the touches, the colours, the tastes, and the odours of ikiiu'a, Vilyu, Tejas, 
Apas, and Prithivi are their specific forms so far as map be: 
The notes of the garnud, D0 and MA, etc., cold and heat, etc., blue and yellow, etc., 
sweet-smelling, &C., all these differ from each other in name, appearancc and object. Bor 
this reason they arc specific. Of t h e  qualities, five are the specific forms of the Ppithvi; 
four (except smell) of the Apas ; three (besides odour and taste) of t h e  Tejari ; two (besides 
odour, taste and colour) of the Vlyu and o d y  one of the Ak6<aa. These specific forms 
together with the characterist/cs of conjoint action, &C., are termed Gross in this 
philosophy. 
Among those, the characteristics of the P ~ i t h v i  are :-Form, 
heaviness, roughness, 
obstruction, stability, manifestation (vritti), difference, support, turbidity, hardness, 
e n  joyability by all. 
The characteristics of the Apas are :-Smoothness, 
subtlety, clearness, whiteness, 
softness, heaviness, coolness, preservation, purification, cemeotstion. 
The characteristics of the Tejas are :-Going 
upward, cooking, durning, lightn&, 
shining, destruction, power ; possessed of such 
is the Tejas different from the 
previous ones. 
The qualities of the V5 yu are :-transverse 
motion, purification, throwing, pushing, 
strength, movability, throwing no shadow, roughness ; these arc the various charaqtcris tics 
of the VByu. 
The characteristics of the h b a  :-Motion 
in all directions, non-agglomeration, and 
non-obstruction : these three are said to be the characteristics of $k9sa, diflerent from 
the characteristics of the preceding ones. 
It is together with these characteristics that they are called gross. 
Form (mBrti) is hardness brought about (samsiddhilram), stability of the lines of 
action and manifest ation. 
Tejas is heat, stomachic, solar, terrestrial ; everywhere heat exists along with Tejas. 
The whole of this terminology makes no distinction between the characteristic and 
the characterized. 
The. VLyu is changing ; has the nature of constant motion. By movements of straw, 
&a., and by the movements of the body, the V6yu is inferred to be everywhere possessed 
of the quality of motion. 
The &ik&J'a is motion in all directicns, because the perception of sound is found 
everywhere. It has been established above that the sounds of terrestrial objects, &C., 
are only perceived on account of the sound-quality of &&a, 
which resides in t h  
ower 
B P  
of hearing. 
This is meant by the-word Evartlpa, substantive appearance. It is of this generic 
form that the sounds of the notes DO, &c. heat, &C., Whiteness, &C., astringent and sweet 

CII. III. 
ON ATTAINMERTS, 149. 
247 
smell, &C., are the specializetions. The generic qualities of form, QC., too, such as 
Jarnbira, Panas and emblic fruit, &C., differ from each other on account of the differences 
of taste, &c. For this reason these tastes, &C., are specific modifications of these. And 
so it has been said :-Of 
those that fall under a common genus, i.e., those each of whicb 
possesses one generic quality of form, smootl~ness or flow, &C., the differences are due to 
the characteristics possessecl by the individual appearances of DO. &c. 
Thus the generic qualities of fowl, &C., and the specific qualities of sound, &C., have 
been described, 
," 
Now he speaks t o  those-who say that a substance (dravya) is the substratum- of the 
generic and the specific : ' I11 this philosophy a substance is a collection (samudjya) of 
the generic and specifi'0 qualities.' 
Even those who desire to establish that substratum 
of the qualities, cannot possibly conceal the fact of their existence irr one group together. 
And if they do conceal it, it cannot be that a snbstratum of theirs may be possible of exis- 
tence as substance. Hence let even that be the substance. Ye, however, do not find a 
substratum separate from the collection of qualities, and existing as substance. 
AS a collection of stones differs from the stones, and as further a different kind of 
their collection in the shape of a ,mountain is called 
- 
a substance, the doubt arises that a 
mere collectio~l is a srtbstance. For the purpose of removing that doubt and for esta- 
blishing that it is only a particular kind of collection that is called (7, substance, he now 
describes thc variety of groupings :-" A collection is of two ~lescript~ions." Because of 
this a substance is not a mere collection. This is the meaning. 'TWO descriptions' 
mean two different sorts of collections. He describes the first mode :-' The first is that,, 
in which the distinctioll of indiriduals disappears altogether in the whole.' 
They are 
so wlled because the distinction between the dif'fercnt parts has disappeared. It is so 
called because t h e  separation has disappeared. This is the meaning : A collectioll is 
understood by the words body, tree, herd, forest. These words denote a collection, but do 
not denote t h e  different parts of the collections. That is no word denoting these indivi- 
clunl parts is used. IIencc i t  is the collection that is understood. Four illustrations are 
t 
viven with yeferenco t o  the parts being joined or separate and with reference to intelli- 
b 
gcnce and non-intelligence. The meaning of the joined and separate parts will be des- 
cribed further on. 
He describes the second mode :-' A collection, the distinction of whose parts is 
understood by the words as both gods and men.' 
/ 
Gods and men ': This collection signifies an account of the parts being indicated 
by separate words, the two separate parts of the group. 
Brit the question is that illwnuch as the distinction of parts is not conveyed by 
using the word both, how is: i t  said that t h ~  
idea of the collection carries with i t  the idea 
of the distinction of parts ? P0r this reason he says :-And 
i t  is by these two parts that a 
collection is signified. The word ' both ' together with t h e  words signifying the different 
parts forms the collection, since the sentence as such denotes the meaning to be conveyed 
by it. This is the meaning. 
Again he says that they are two-fold :-' This again, &C.' With reference to whether 
the distiiictiorl is or is not intended40 be coaveyed. He describes where the distinction 
is intended to be conreyed :--' A grove of mangoes, a crowd of Brihma~as.' There must 
be distinction l~ecaose the genitive case is actually used (not only implied.) 
As in the 
case of the phrase, ' the cow of the Gargas. 
9 
He describes where t h e  distinction is not illtended to be conveyed :-' Mango grove, 
Briihmana class.' 
The meaning is that the mangoes are the same as the grove ; it is not 
intel~ded that there should be difference understood between the collection and the 
individuals that go to make up the collection. They both imply a common object. 

-
-
p
 
- 
He mentions another division :-' That again is twofold. Where t h e  parts of the 
whole are separate from each other.' 
This means that there is space between the 
individuals that go to make up the collection. Such groups are signified by the words, 
a herd, a forest. 
Their parts have spaces between them, the trees md t h e  kine. 
The groups whose parts are not separate from each other are such as a tree, a cow, 
an atom. Their parts have no space between them. Whether they are taken to be the- 
generic or the specific qnalities, or the udders, &C., they have no spaces between. 
Now he establishes which of these collections is what is called a substance :-' Whose 
parts are not meant to be distinguished from each other, &C.' 
t 
Having thus described a substance as the context demanded, he now comes to the 
subject in hand :-' This has been called the substantive appearance.' 
He puts a question with the object of describing the third appearance :--' And what 
is their subtile appearance ?' and gives the answer :-' It is the TanmCtra, &C.' 
One 
of its parts is an atom possessing dimension. The generic quality thereof is form 
(marti). Sound, &C., 
are its speciflc qualities. It consists of the generic md speciflc 
qualities. It is a group which follows the difference of the generic and speciflc qualities, 
its parts existing without any intervening space. Further as an atom has subtlety in op. 
pearance, so are the TanmPtras subtle in appearance. He summarizes :-h 
This is the third.' 
Now the fourth appearance of the elements consists of the qualities which have 
respectively the characteristics of illumination, activity and inertia and whose character- 
istics too follow the nature of effects. For this reason are they described by the word 
Conjunction (anvaya). NOW he describes their fifth appearance, purposefulness :--' The 
purpose of enjoyment and emancipation is apparcnt in con juuction with the qualities.' 
Well, even if it he so, if the qualities be purposeful, how are the effects of the quali- 
ties purposeful ? For this reason he says : -' The qualities are to be found, &C.' The 
things made of elomonts are such as a cow or a jar. 
Haviug thus described the Samyama and that upon which the. Sarnyalua is to be 
performed, he now describes the Sarpyam and its fruit :-' Now by Sayyama over the 
elements, &C.' 
The powers (prakpitis) oP the elements are their natures.-43. 
m: Tatab, thence. slFim& AqimCgdi, of attenuation and the other powers. 
v h :  
Prbdurbhbvab, the manifestation of. m Kiiya, of the body. v 
Sampad, 
perfection. v Tad, their. 
~4 DDharma, characteristics. e: 
gnabhighhtab, 
non-resistance by. 
v Cha, and. 
44. 
Thence 
the 
manifestation 
of 
attenuation 
(anims) 
. 
and the other (powers) ; as also the perfection of 
the body and non-resistance by their characteristics.---150. 

Of these, attenuation 
(Animi?) : becomes atomical. 
Buoyancy 
becomes 
light. Enlargement : becomes large. Approach 
(Priipti) : 
touches even the moon by the tip of his finger. Unrestrained will 
(PrlkLmya): absence of restraint to Ibis n7ill: merges into earth just as 
he plunges into water. 
Control (Vaditra) :-Obtains 
power over the elements and objecte 
made thereof, and controls others. 
Creative Power ( f di tri ttva) :- Controls appearance and disappearance 
and aggregat inns. 
Ful filrnent of desires is the objective reality of one;; determi~lation, 
i.e., the natures of the elements assume such appearances as he thinks of. 
AI though he possesses the power, he does not interfere to set the 
objects of the world topsy-turvy. 
Whv 
a, 
not ? Because his desire with 
refereace to tllem is the same always which another Siddlla of the same 
power has fornlerly willed. 
These are the eigllt attaininellte. The 
perfection of the body mill be described. ' Non- resistance by their 
- cl~aracteristica ':-The 
Pi1i tlwi does not by cohesion int.erEere with the 
action of a Yogi's body. 
He might eveu enter a stone in virtue of the use 
of his powers. The waters with their viscidity do not wet him. The fire 
does not burn llim by its heat. The air moves him not by ita motion. 
Even in Aksda, which naturally offers 1-10 obstruction, his body might 
beco~ne obstructed to sight. Even the Siddhas may fail to see hinl.--150. 
NOW the author describes what powers the Yogi attains, when the eloments begin 
to follow his thoughts:-' 
Thence the manifestation of Attenuation (A~~irni) 
as also the 
perfection of the body, :md non-resistance by their characteristics. 
The Commentator says that by S a n p m a  over the gross states of the elements and 
thereby masterink t h e m  come four at: ainmrnts. Of these, attenuation is the power of 
the i~ocly's becoming small even though i t  is large. Buoyancy means the power of its 
becoming light, even though it is heavy. Having become light it moves in spaco like 
a straw or a piece of cotton wwl. En1:irgcment is the pwvsr of its becoining large like- 
a mountain or'the sky, eveu tllough it is small. Approach is thc power By which all esis- 
tences come within blm reach of the Yogi; thus he can touch tho moon with the tip of hi8 
finger, thongh standing on the earth. 
He describes the attainments obtaiued by the performance of Sayyams over substan- 
tive appearance (svardpa). Unrestrained will is the absence ot reetraint 
hi. will. B b  
82 

form is not resisted by the substantive qualities of form, &a. 
He merges into and emerge8 
. 
out of earth, as if itwere water. 
He describes the attainment to be obtained by Sagyama and consequent mastery 
over the subtile form :ab 
Control :-The elements are Prithvt &C.' Objects made thereof 
are each as a COW and a jar. 'Obtains power over them': acts with reference to them 
just as he wishee. 
As to the objects made of the elemeuts, it is necesmry that when their causes, the 
tanmtitras, and the atoms of PrithvI, &C., am controlled, their effects also should  me 
under control, because they remain in whabver condition or arrangement he places 
them. 
Now he describes the attainmenix3 to be obtained by Sarpyamaover and mastery of 
the conjunction (anvaya):-Creative 
Power:-Having 
maetered the MQlaprakriti he can 
control the birth, destruction, and present existence, as it is for the time being of the 
elements and things made of them. 
He describes the attainments due to the perfomance of Gslpyama over porposeiul- 
ness. '~ulfllment of desires' means the objective reality of one% desires. The Yogi 
who h= become the master of the purpose of the qualities, makee everything according 
to the purpose he thinks they should fulfil. Even if he conceives that poison should act 
upon the body as Amrita, it would act so, and having taken poison he would still live. 
Well, let that be, but if he possessed these pawere he wonld interfere with the order 
of nature in t h e  world, but why does he not do so ? He may transform the moon into the 
sun : or h e  may make the day from which the moon is totally absent, one from which ehe 
i s  not at all absent. Ror this -on 
he says :-Although 
he possessee the power, etc., 
these worshipful ones who have obtained the power of ordering as they deeire, do nob 
like to act against the will of iiivara. As to the powers of objects they are changeable 
according to tbe difference of clam, space, time and condition, and their natures are not 
for that rcason permanent. Itsi~, therefore, proper that they should act in accordanoe - 
with their desire. These are the sight attainments. 
' Non-resistance by their cbaracteristics : '-The 
mention of non-reaistnnce of these 
elements after the attainment of attenuation, &C., even though this is the result of the 
attainments themeelves, ie similar to the mention of the perfection of the body even though 
this is achieved by this very attainment. The reason is that the object of Saarpyama 
mentioned in this aphorism may be easily understood together with the fruit to be - l 
obtained by the performsnoe of the &myamas mentioned in tho aphorism. 
The rest L 
easy.-44. 
I 
i~ Rfipa, beauty. 
Lbaqya, grace. m Bala, strength. W lTajra, of 
adamant, adamantine. m Samhanana, the power of striking or of bearing the 
etrokee, hardnese, all 
45. The 
grace, strength 
them embody, wmq KAya-Sampat, perfection of the body. 
perfection of the body consists in beauty, 
and adaman tine hardness.-151. 

CH. 111. 
ON ATTAIh7MENT'S, 151, 152. 
251 
I 
vylisk 
Fit to be seen, lovely, possessed of great strength, a body hard W 
adamant.-151. 
V~CHABPATI'S GLOSS. 
The body is said to be adamantine when its build is as hard a3 that of adamant. 
%tl-a 
46. 
v 
Grahaqa, the act. 
Svarilpa, the substantive appearance. 
A smi t$ egoism. M Anvaya, conj unction. dw~ 
Arthavattva, purposefulness 
(of sensation). 
-3 
Samyamrid, by Saqqmrna over. 
d+~-am: Indriya-jayab, 
mastery over the senses. 
46. 
By Samyama 
C 
over the act, 
the substantive 
appearance, the egoism, the conjunction and the purpose- 
fulness (of sensation) comes mastery over them.-152. 
VYASA. 
Sound, &C., possessed of generic qualities are objects. The act of 
sensation consists in the functioning of the senses with reference to the 
objects. 
And this functioning is not merely the taking in of the generic 
qualities of an object, because if also the specific qualities of an object 
were not thus taken in, how would they otherwise be perceived by the 
mind ? 
As to their substantive appearance, a sense is a substance ; it is a 
collect ion of generic and specific qualities whose parts are not possessed 
of intervening space and are not distinguishable as being separate from 
each other. 'Fhese generic and specific qualitiee are of the essence of the 
.W ill-to-be whose very nature is illumination. 
Their third appearance is the principle of individuality character- 
ized by egoism. The senses are the specialized- appearances of that 
generic appearance. 

252 
PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
*. 
The fourtllappearance consists of the q d i t i e s  which are of the 
nature of illumination, activity and inertia and which determine the 
nature of phenomena. The senses together with the prin~iple of indiri- 
duality are their manifestations. 
The fifth appearance is that of their having the purpose of the 
Purusa to fulfil. This is inherent in tlle qualities. 
Samyarna is to be 
performed over the five appemapces of sensation, respectively, one after 
the other. 
When all the five appearances have been mastered, then the 
V~CHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
The author describes the means of concluering the senses for the Yogi who has mas- 
tered the elements : -' By Samyama over the act, t h e  substantive appearance, the egoism, 
#e conjunction and the purposefulness (of sensL\tion), comes mastery ever the senses.' 
Themeaning is that Samya~ca is to be performed wit11 reference to the act, the substantive 
appearance, the egoism, - the conjunction and the p ~rposefulness, separ$tely, one after 
ailother. The act of sensation consists in the taking in of objects, and this depends upon 
t&e objects to bo taken in. Hence the determination of the nature of the act depends 
upon the detertninatioil of the nature of the objects to be taken in. 
The Cornmeritator describes the nature of the object to be taken in :-6 
sounds, &c*, 
*re possessed of the generic and specific qualities.' 
Having described the objects to be taken in he now describes the act of taking in:- 
'And the functioning, &C.' This functioning consists of sensing, i. e., the sense being 
modified into the form of t3e object. A s  to those who hold that the sphere of the func- 
tion of the senses is thc generic qualities alone, he says to them:-'And 
it does not con- 
sist in taking in only the form of the generic qualities.' 
That which is taken in is not -- 
only CO-existence with the generic qualities of the object. The mind is dependent for it8 
action upon external senses, and works up011 the external objects and depends upon them. 
If this were not so, there would bc 110 blind and deaf people. If, such being the case, the 
senses were not to have the specific qualities for their sphere of action, the specific 
qualities would not at all be known, HOW then would the mind know them in sequence ? 
Hence the act of sensation consists in the taking in of both the generic and the specific 
l ies. 
qual' t 
This act of taking in is the first phenomenon of the senses. 
Now he describes the second appearance.:--' As to substantive appearance :-g 
It is 
the principle of iudividuality which produces the power of sensation out of its own 0s- 
sence (the Sattva). Hence the instrumentality which is generic nature of the senses 
and also the action in connection with the appointed sphere of colour, &C., which is the 
specific quality, both are of the nature of illumination. This is the meaning. 
This is their third appearance. The principle of individuality is of course the 
&use of t h e  senses. Wherever t h e  senses are there m u s t  t h e  principle of individuality 
be. Being thus the common cause of the senses, i t  is the generic quality of these senses. 
Ths fourth appearance :-The 
qualities appear as possessing two forms. They are 
~f the nature'of things which exist as such ; and they are also of t h e  nature of the power 
determines. the existence of phenomena. Of these the nature of the things in 
existence as such consists in their being the objects of knowledge ; and these are the 
five TanmLtras, the eloaents and the things made of the elements. The power again which 

C R. 7II. 
ON ATTAINMENTS, 152, 155. 
253 
t 
determines the existence of the phenomena takes up the form of the instruments of 
knowledge, and consists of the senses together wit h the principle of individuality. Thig is 
the meaning. The rest is easy.--46. 
Sfitra 47. 
m: Tat&, thence. 9%-e~qlfano-javitvam, quickness (as of the mind). 
ihw-m: Vikara~a-bhLvnh, uninstrumental perception. wm Pradhbua, over the 
first cause. 
W: Jayab, mastery. 
47. Thence come quickness as of mind, un-instm- 
mental-perception ancl mastery over the Praclhiina (First 
Quicltness as of mind consists in the nttnin~rlerlt by the body of tery 
quick motion. 
Un-instrumell tal Perception means the action of the senses at m y  
titne or place without the necessity of the presence of the body. 
Mastery over the Pradlldnn means the pon7er of control over all the 
modificationsof the Prak!iti. 
These three attninuients are called by the 
name of JIsdhuprati k9. 
These &re' oh tailled by conqriering the substan- 
tive appearance (svarapa) of the five iustru tnen ts of sensation. - 153. 
VACHASPATI~S GLOSS. 
- 
The author mentions the attainments due to the conquest of the five appearances 
of the scnscs :-' Thence come quickness as of mind, un-instrumental perception and 
mastery over the Pradhiina.' 
Un-instrumental perception is the action of the scnscs outside the body. Place 
means Cashmere. &c. Time m'cans past, BC. Sphere means the subtle, &c. 
Mastery over the Pracllijna means control of t h e  modification of the Pralrpiti by the 
conynest of the senses together with the power of con.junction. These are tlic attain- ' 
ments which are callecl the Madhupratikds by the knowers of Yoga. 
Well, it may be that by the conquest of the sorrse.; they m y  colno under control. 
But how their causes, the Pradhtina, &C.? For this reasoll he says : ' And these, &C.' 
The 
five appearances of the senses are their act, &c. 
' By their conquest, &C.' 
The meaning is this : J t  is not by the mere conquest of 
the senses that these powers are obtained, b:lt by the conquest of all the five appearances; 
and the Praclhgna, &G., fall within these.-- 47. 

P ~ ~ T A N J A L I ' S  
YOGA. 
SQtra 48. 
w r g m = m ~ R w ~ m  
&rrnrwm 
, 
inq 
Sattva, pure objective essence. 
Purulga, consciousness. m 
Anyat&, the distinction between. -re-ww Ktlybti rniitrasya, to him only who 
recognises. aa-m Sarva-bhbva, over all states. ~
~
w
R
~
Adhisthbtrittvam, 
* - A  
supremacy. 
ad-vmy, Sarva-J natritvam, omniscience. 
e Cha, and. 
* 
48. To him who recognizes the distinction between 
consciousness and pure-objective-existence comes supre- 
macy 
U over all states of being ancl omnisciewe.- 154. 
wmpmamr&atsw W 
a I Nam- 
m i t m ~ r  ewmzr Pt tnrd 
& ~ ~ & w i  
&mm w t a p r -  
,W~WTIMKYSTR~~ 
~WMJ~W< 
I d
i
h
 
~ W W F V ~
1
:
 
WM h' 
m$~~wm~l?rnkm 
W&: 
I &m@ a4ksli 
4 h 
gmi ~~~~?~rr;im;v~~im'clr&~+~ 
m
m
 
& 3 d  ard%vr& I 
V Y ~ S A .  
Supremacy over all states of being comes to him who, haring the 
essence of the Will-to-he in the highest state of purity on account of the 
impnrities of the Rajas and the Tamas having been destroyed, and when 
the consciousness of power is at the highest, takes his stand at the mani- 
festation of the distinction between the Objective Essence and conscious- 
ness (Pnrusa). It means that the ' qualities ' which are the substrata of 
all phenomena, being of the nature of the tllir~qs that are in existence, 
as well as of the power which determines this existence, present them- 
selves before the Lord, the knower of the field, as one whole. 
~ m n i s c i e n c e  means the si~nul 
taneously cliscri rninative knowledge of 
the ' qualities ' being as they are of the nature of all phenomena, and 
shomi~~g 
forth as they do separately the quiescent, the disturbed and 
the unpredicable 
This attainment is known as the ' Sor- 
rorvless' (vidoka). 
Reaching this the Yogi mores omniscient and powerful, with all 
his afflictions ended.-154. 
V ~ ~ H A S P A T I ' S  GLOSS. 
Now the author shows the attainments subsidiary to t h e  attainment of the knowledge 
of the distinction between t h e  Objective Essence and the Purtqa, with t h e  object of 
attaining which are performed the Sapyamas which bring aboubpower of knowledge 
and action, and which by direct knowledge, and one after the other, go on strengthening 
f a i ~  
in the object promised, by means of t h e  presents of the attainments that are being 
made constantly :-6 
To him who realizes the distinction between the Objective Existence 
and consciousness, comes just then supremacy over all the states of being and omniscience,' 

Cli. III. 
ON ATTAL,'\"II.ZLVTS, 154, 155. 
255 
49. The seed of bondage having been destroyed by 
&sirelessness even fol* that, comes , absolute-ind ependence 
(Kaivnlvn).-155. 
U 
h q q  
1 q ~ % i  
sraR $qr;dwik mamri 
f$?Lq&~ d: 
TIT* a S& 
mi wriar6wrft g&=: u t a r R h p  
f $ C m m ~ r l  mi3 $ n h R  qwnrh@a7;wmamqG& .mR 
q=Kn m* r
l
e
 
l 
*%!J 
~ m :  
g ? v  rn~STTi ? pm' l 
apni mb aii&nRm~~hvR?~&mt 
dhbrilraafta<3 gmm- 
elf%& grim: 
aijr =%iWm 
fgftnfmta psr * 
11 09 P 
r 
vufixs. 
\ .  
When he comes to t l ~ i n k  that the discrimiuatiuw of the clistillc~ive 
natures, is 
t after all a manifestation of the quality of Essentiality (Sattva) 
and that the quality of essentiality has been classed with avoidable 
pains ; and that the Purusa is unchangeable, pure and other than the 
quality of essentiality (Sat ha) then he begins to lose his desire for that, 
and then the afflictions llaving had their seed burnt up, become incapable 
of sprouting again like the burnt up seeds of rice. 
Then all the seeds of aflliciions pass, together with the; mind, into 
latency. 
When t h y  have become late~lt, the Purusa d ~ e s  
not then suffer 
frdm the triad of pain. This then', the state, that is to say, in which the' 
qualities manifest in the mind as &=flictionk, ac:tious and fruitions do ~~ot;,;~~ 
having fulfilled their object, come back to action, is the firm1 sepaikitionz: 

of consciousness from the cluslities. This is the state of absolnte inrle- 
pontlence, when the Puru.i;s r e a u i n ~  conscio~~sness alone, as in its own 
Because the other &myamas are all but the semblances of the object of the Purusa 
the author now shows that the S q y r m a  for the attninluont of discrio~inativo knowledge 
is the fi~lfllrnent of the purpose of the Purqr, inrsrnuch as its fruit is the attainment ot 
absolute indepcndenco by means of the manifestation of desirelessnosu : On the des- 
truction of tilt? seed of alRictiuns by desirclcssncss even for that, comes absolute inde- 
pendence.' When on tlm d~stroction of actions and amictions, tho Yogi becomes eonsciow 
of what 40 says i 4  k~~owledge 
of discrimil~ation as a chsrrrctoristio of the Sattva, &ca' The 
e 
rest has been described here and there m d  is therefore easy--49. 
S ~ t r a  
50. 
dhfGwd 
Stllrini-upnnimen t sage, on the invitation by the presiding 
deities. (f-j 
(d~) 
r() Sanm 
0 9 attachment. 
W Srnays, smile of aatisfcrction. - _ 
Akarapam, nowperformance of. F: 
Puaah, i
n
 
m%g Anista, with 
the undesirable. 
Prasadg%t., contact being poeeible. 
50. Wlen the presiding-deities invite, there, should 
be no at.tachment and no smile of satisfaction ; contact. 
with the unclesir,zble being again possible.-156. 

CH. III. 
ON ATITA INNEXTS, l=%. 
,257 
~ 
I 
VY,~S,A. 
6 Wile11 tlie pt-ssid i ! ) g  (hi ties invite, there slmultl be no at taclmen t* 
aud uo smile of s:&-;faction ; contact with the uodesirable bei~lg again 
' 
possible. 
Tllere:rl-c Eoar classesof Yogis:--(l) 
The prnthama knlpika; 
(2) The ruaclllubll Li idea ; i 3) The Praj fiiijyotih ; (4) The atikr5ntal~hA.- 
l 
vaniya. 
The first is the one who is pmctising nncl in whom the light is 
just appearing. 
The secold is he who has attained the ICitambharii 
r 
cognition. 
rile t L i d  is he who l m  nttniiled power over the elernellts 
aud the senses, who prcserres all that lms been known and has to be 
known, who llns b e m  doing wlmt has to be tloi~e ant1 d l o  is given to 
I 
practice. The Iourtil is the A tiltr311tabl~C~valliyn. His sole object is to 
make the llliild later1 t in the IJrntll~ina. Its stages are the eeven-fold 
I 
in finality. 
l 
l 
Of these then the Br2hnlana to whom opens up the yet unseen 
l 
' plane of i\iatllnmnti, is invited by tthe gods from their .ronous places. 
l 
l 
They tell him, ' Come, sit here ; enjoy yourselves here ; this is a lovely 
l 
enjoyment, here is a. lovely dame1 ; this is the elixir of life, which 
con~lte~.acts 
old age aud death ; here is a vehicle ml~icll moves through 
the skies ; these the kalpa trees ; this is the pnre strewn oE Mancliikid ; 
these tlie perfected ones, the great seers, and beautiful and obedient 
nylnplls ; here are clairvoyauce and clair-audience ; here a body of 
adnmsntine strength. You llave earlled all these by your virtues. 
Coine, 
take all this. Thi8 is an eterid, unfadii~g, undying position which the 
oods love.' 
a 
Tllus addressed, let 11 int contemplate u p w  defects of attachment. 
' It is with d i k i l t y  that I l w e  procured the light of Yoga, the destroyer 
l 
of the tlarliness of aflictions, after having been long backed by the &mes 
of the world and rolled into the darkness of birth and death. These 
win& of sensuous enjayn~ent, brougl~t into sensuous existence by desire, 
are Cal~ulatt?d to put that light out. 
Having seen all this how should 
I allow myself to be deluded by the mirage of sensuous enjoyments and 
put ~uyself as fuel again iuto the burning fire of the same changeful 
existence. 
Farewell then, ye sensuous en joyments ; ye are but dreams, 
fit only to be enjoyed by weaklings.' 
Having thus come upon a fired resolution, let him practise his 
meditation. Having thus not allowed himself to become attached, let 
him not indulge himself in a smile of satisfaction that even the gods 
I 
begged him. If he indulges in such satis'faction, he will never perceive 
himself as having his hair in the grasp of death, and resting in fancied 
88 

258 
PATAlSJA LI'S YOGA. 
security. Thus forgetfulness ever on the watch for a hole, ancl ever full 
of efforts, would find its way into the mind; and once there it mill bring 
the afflictions back to life ; and thence will come ia contact with the 
undesirable. Thus avoiding attachment a11 cl 
me11 tal pride, the high 
mental state will obtain firm hold upon him ancl the object that is to be 
attained, will ever keep in front.--156. 
l 
, 
- 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Now seeing that there is possibility of obstacle in the way of the YO& who is prac- 
tising the means of perfect freedom (kaivalya), the author teaches the cause of its re- 
moval :--' M7hen the presiding deities invite, there should be no attachment and no smile 
of satisfaction ; there being possibility of contact with the undesirable again.' 
The presiding deities are Mahmdra, &C., who function in thc regions of the powers 
thus obtained by the Yogi. The invitation comes from them. Attachment and a smile of 
satisfaction should not be indulged therein, because in that case tlicre is again the pssi- 
bility of the recurrence of the undesirable. Now with the object of determining the class 
of the Yogi whom the gods invite from their places, the Commentator mentions all the 
classes of possible Yogis : ' There are four classes, to.' Now he describes the nature of 
the Prsthama-kalpiba :-' Of these he who practises, &C.' I11 him the light of the how- 
ledge of objects, suchpas the mind of others, &C., has just appeared ; it has not been 
mastered by him. 
H e  mentions the second :-' He who possesses the truth-bearing CO@- 
tion, &c. ' The cognition there is trnth-bearing (Ritambharhf. It is ho who desires to 
conquer the elements and the senses. 
He mentions the third :-4Io who has conquered the element8 and the senses.' 
By this the elemeilts and the senses have been conquered by Sayyama over the gross and 
other appearances and over the act of sensation and other appearances. He described 
him further :-In 
all those that have besn achieved by the conquest of the elements and 
the senses, such as knowing the mind of others, &C., he makes up his mind to preserve, 
so that they may not be destroyed, In those again which have still to be achieved, such 
as the ' Sorroivless, &k,' up to the highcr desirelessnc~ss, he resorts to all the means that 
should be adopted. The eftort of many achieves the object of attainment by resortiilg to 
the proper means only. 
He mentions the fourth :--' The fourth, &c. ' This worshipful being absolutely free 
while yet in life, m d  possessing only the last body, has the sole object of making t h e  
mincl latent in the First Cause (Practh5na). 
Out of these he determines the Yogi who is invited by the gods :-' To whom opens 
up the yet unseen plane of Madhumati, &C.' 
As to the fieophyte (Prathama-kalpika) there is not the least suspicion in the mincl of 
Biahendra, W., that he will get to the end of Yoga. The third also is not to be invited 
by thew, because he has got what they invite him for, by his conquest of the elements and 
the senses, In the fourth also the suspicion of attachment is removed the farthest on 
account of his having reached the state of higher desirelessness. He who remains is 
the second alone, tit to be the object of invitation. It is he alone whose copition is 
truth-bearing, that can be the object of invitation. ' Undying ' is that which is not 
deetroyed. ' Unfading ' is that which is ever fenewed. 
S 
He d~scribes the fault of the smile of satisfaction :--' If he indulges in the smile of 
satisfaction, &c. ' He will never understand impermanency, being possessed of a false 
sense of security on account of satisfaction. The rest is easy. 
i ' .  , .  

CB. IIT. 
ON ATTAIYMENTS, 156, 157. 
259 
In different places it has been said that omniscience resultsfrom Sarpyama. That, 
however, does not inean the knowledge of everything without exception. It only describes 
the nature of the knowledge, aswhen they say,'We have tasted all vegetablee.' 
The 
meaning here is that we have tasted all sorts of sauces, not that there is none left. The 
word ' all ' ( sarva ) does signify that nothing remains ; as in the word ' The eater has eaten 
all the food that was given to Km. ' Here the meaning is that nothing remains.-50. 
1 
W W ~ W ~ T :  
Ilp~a-tat-krarnnyoh, (as) over the moments. (mJ And their. 
l 
(m) S I I C C ~ Y S ~ O ~ .  6- 
Sarpyamht, by Samyama. 
Vivekajam, born-of-dis- 
crimination. m, Jfibnarn, knowledge. 
l 
51. By Samyama over the moments and their suc- 
cession, comes knowledge 
C 
born-of-discrimination.---157. 
As an atom is a substance in which minuteness reaches its limit, 
so, a moment is a division of time in which minuteness reaches its limit. 
Or a moment is that much of time which an atom takes in leaving the 
position in space it occupies and reaching the next point. The succession 
of rnornents is the non-cessation of the flow thereof. The moments and 
their collection do not fall into a collection of 
actual things. The 
MuhQrta, the day and night are all aggregates of mental conceptions. 
This tilne ~vllich is not a substantive reality in itself, but is only a mental 
concept, and which comes into the mind as a piece of verbal knowledge 
only, appears to people whose minds are given to out-going activities, 
if it were an objective reality. The moment falls under the head of reality, 
and is maintained by succession. This succession consists in the sequence 
1 
of moments. The Yogis who know time call this by the name of time. 

pi!TANJALI'S YOQA. 
- 
Further two moments cannot CO-exist. There can be no auccessio.n 
of two CO-existent moments. It is impossible. The uninterrupted 
sequence of the first moment ancl of the one which follows, is what is 
called succession. For this there is but one moment existing in the 
present ; the antecedent and postcedent moments do not exist. There- 
fore, there cannot be any collection of them. 
Further, the moments that have passed and those that have yet 
to come, should be described as existing in consequence of universal 
change in evolution. For this reason the whole world undergoes change 
every moment, all these chsracteristics are rela tirely established in 
that one moment of time. B 
Samyalua over the moments and their 
succession, direct knowledge is obtained of them both, and thence ia 
manifested discriminative knowledge.-157. 
V~CHASPATI'S GLOfiS. 
Here the author describes the samyama which is the means of obtaining the know- 
ledge born out of discrimination:-' By Samyama over moments and their- succession cornea 
knowledge born of discrimination. ' The Commentator gives the meaning of the word 
moment ' by an illustration :-' As the atom, &c. ' Wherever in tr piece of stone, which 
is being divided and divided again and again, smallness reaches a point begond which it 
cannot go, it is said to raach the limit of miuuteness. That is called an atom. Similarly, 
the nttermost limit of minuteness of time, is a moment, a division of t i m e  which is not 
related to any other division of time as a part antecedent and p.outcedent. 
He describes the same moment in another way :--' Or, as much as, &C.' The meaning 
is that a moment is that much of time in which a mere atom may go off its present place. 
He describes the meaning of the word succession :-' The non-cessation of the flow, 
&c,' ' Thereof ' means of the moments. 
\ 
Further this sort of succession is not real. It is, on the other hand, a mental concept. 
Because it is impossible that a collection of them should be contemplated as real, seeing 
that they do not exist simultaneously, he says this :-' The momeuts and their succession, 
h' 
Because succession has for its characteristio the existence of a moment not in 
eimultaneity, and because the collective existence of moments is devoid of objective 
reality, the collective existence of moments and their succession is also void of objective 
wality. Men without the natural ercessivo intellection of a Vaibintika, being every 
moment given to knowledge which cousists in out-going activity, and who are, therefore, 
confused, think that this Time is a reality. 
Well then, Is the Motuent also unreal ? He answers in the negative. 
The moment, 
however, is classed among realities, ' is a real substance. ' It is given support to by 
succession' :-The 
succession that gives support to the moments is only a mental concept, 
the result of imagination ( vikalpo ). 
He gives the reason for the succession giving support to the moment :-G 
As to 
eaccession, &c. ' * 
He gives the reason for the succession being unreal :v4 
And two moments, &c. ' The 
word ' and, ' here signifies the reason why. ' 
He s a p  to him who holds that the moments each belonging to a diffemnt class may 
w x i s t  ;-4 
There can be no successiona &F. ' 
,/ 

CH. III. 
ON ATTAINMENTS, 157, 158. 
- 261 
4 
Why is it impossible P POP thie reason he says :-g 
6uccessioil is, &c. ' He M& 
eludes : --' For this reason. 
9 
Well, then, are the anteccden t and postcedcnt moments of the na'ture of the horns 
of a hare only ? Be say@, No, 
The moments that are gone and those that are yet to 
come, &C.' 
Existing in consequence of! universal change :-This means followed- in sequence 
similar. Conclndes :-' Tl~e~efore, 
&c. ' Because the present o n l ~  
has the power over the 
actions of objects proper to itl.--61. 
S$ra 
52. 
. 
arrfir J$ti, genus. 
Laksaps, differentia. 3s DePa, position in space by 
all these. 
a;9m AnyatL, by separateness. dq 
Anavachchhedat, there being 
no distinction. M: .Tnlynyoh, of two eimilars. m: 
%tab, thereby. M: 
Pratipattih, the distinction. 
52. Two-similars are thereby distinguished when 
not- separa t8elv 
a, 
clistinguishable by 
L 
genus, differentia and 
0 1 
position-in-space .- 1 58. 
Its sphere is defined :-' Two similaw are thereby distinguish- 
ed, when not separately distinguishable by germs, differentia and posi- 
tion in space. ' When position and seconclary qualities are t11e same, the 
genus causes distinction between two similars. Tllus ' This is a cow,' 
' This is a mare.' 
When position and genus are common, the secondary 
quality causes distinction, as is the case with a black-eyed cow and an 
auspicioue cow. Between two emblic fruits in which the genus and 
mcondary qualities are the same, uifference of position causes distinction, 

This is anterior and this is posterior. 
When, however, the anterior emblic 
fruit moves on to the position of the posterior one in space, at a time 
when the seer may be looking elsewhere, the position becoming the same, 
it can no longer cause distinction (as to which it was originally), the 
anterior or the posterior ? In the knowledge of truth, however, there 
shoidd be no doubt. Hence has it been said, 'They are thereby distin- 
guished. ' It means, by discriminative knowledge 
How ? The space 
correlated to the moment of time of the anterior emblic fruit, is different 
from the space correlated to the moment of time of the posterior emblic 
fruit. 
And the emblic fruits arc separate in the sequential notions of the 
movements in time correlated to their distinct positions in space. The 
sequential notion of space correlated to anotsher moment of time is the 
-means of their distinction. 
As in this case, so in the case of atoms which havo community of 
genus, secondary quality ancl position in space. By discovering the yet 
unknown correlation of every atomic position in space to a different 
moment of titne, the sequential notiou of such a position in space for 
the anterior atom becomes distinct from such a position in space for 
the distinction of atoms, on the analogy of this illustration. The pomer- 
ful Yogi knows this distinction by the correlated moment. 
Others however say :-It is the last peculiarities (the Videsa of 
the Vaideoikas) that cause the n h o n  of distinction. Even there the 
distinction is the difference of space and aecondary quality and' the 
difference oE form, distance and genus. The distinction on account of the 
moment of time can, however, be gra~ped by the i~ltellect of a Ycgi done. 
Ap has been said by VPrsagaqya : -' On account of the absence of 
the difference of form, intervening space and genus, there is no separation 
in the root.'-158. 
VACHASPATI~S GLOSS. 
Although this knowledge born of discrimination has all existences for the sphere of 
its operation, as will be shown further, still being very subtle, one particular sphere is 
first defined :-a 
Two similltrs are thereby distinguished, when not sepsrately distinguish- 
able by genus, differentia and position.' 
For ordinary me11 the difference of genus is the 
cause of the knowledge oldistinction. Vhon gmus such as the characteristic of a cow 
is the same ; when also space, such as presence in the east, &C., is the samc ; then the 
distinction of the black-eyed and the auspicious is the other means of distinction. In 
two emblic fruits the genus of emblic fruit is the same, the differentim of roundness, &a., 
are the same. The difference of space, however, is another means of distinction. When, 
however, some one desiro'us of testing the knowl~dge of the Yogi, takes the anterior fruit 
when he has his attention turned towards something, and places it in the spot previously 
woopied by the other fruit, having removed the other fruit from there or having conceal- 
ed it, then the space also becomes the same, and it can no longer be decided that tbis i e  

CIi. III. 
ON ATTA IXUENTS, 158. 
263 
I 
the former and this is the latter. The ordinary wise man who is clover in the use of tho 
three means of knowledgo, will not be able to clistingoish the t WO undcr such circum- 
stances. Tho knowledge of reelilies, hen-ever, should be ficc from doubt. It is not proper . 
that a Yogi who is possessed of cli~c~imioative 
knowlcdgc slrould rcmnin itoobtfnl. Hence 
has the author of the aphorism said :--'Arc thereby distinguislicd, &C.' 
Explains ' thereby.' It lnenns by discriminstiro lmowledge. The qlwstion now is : 
How can knowledge born by Snmyama over woments and thciq sncccssion distinguish an 
elublic fruit from another which is the same with rofcreilcc to genus, secondary quality 
and position in space? The Co:nmc?ntntor gives the DI~S\VCP :-' The space correlated 
to the mo~nent of time of the anterior cmblic fruit, is cliffercnt from t h e  spsco correlated 
to the moment of time of tiro posterior emblic fruit.' ' Tlro space oorrclated to the 
moment of time of the anterior crnl~lic fruit, lnenns thc spaco which coincides with the 
one ~noment 
of tin~e of the anterior emblic fruit ; or in othc18 words, the cliai~ge which has 
no interval between itsclf ancl tlm o m  monlent of timc. It is cliEerent from the position 
in spnco correlated to the iuoment of time of the posterior frnit, i.e., from the un-inter- 
rupted clm~gc of the posterior fruit. 
Let tlicre be tlic iliffercncc of ~ositiocs 
jn space ; but how does it affcot the distinc- 
tion of the fruit ? &'or 
this 
he says :-' And the emblic fruits are separate in the 
sequcnt ial not iom of their moments of time cormlatecl to their posibio~..~ 
in space. The 
mouient of tinm illat is corrclntcd to the distinct position in spacc of the emblic froit, is 
that portiocl of time which is indicatecl by the change of antcriority and posteriority iu its 
own position in s p e c .  ?'he notion of this n~oment of time correlatccl to its distiilct 
position means the kno~vleclge thcrcof. I t  is by this linonklgc that the fruits are dis- 
tingnishcd. Tlw perfonnrr of Sa~uj.arna knows that t h e  two emblic fruits are "cliffcreiit, 
by t ho lrno~~~lcdgc 
of their becoulii~g cllaracterizecl by a moment of time correlated to the 
change of anteriority and posteriori tly, i r ~  a position other than that in which t llc changes 
of nilteri~rit~y 
and posteriorit y in a moment of time existed formerly. Now altlio~~gll 
the 
former placc 11os been cl~anged, ~ h c  
Eamyama is performed with reference to the moment 
of time correlatccl to the present changed position of the same object, qualifiecl by the 
change oi posit ion in space clifTcrcnt from thc former out. Uy the performance of this 
Salnpma direct kimwleclge is obtained of t h e  change it1 tlilnc in the otller position. For 
this reason i t  has bcen said :-' The sequential notion of the moment of time correlated to 
another position in space, becomcs tile cause of their rlistilxtioil.' 
Now Ire S ~ J S  
that by the analogy of this verj illustration, tllc samc sort of distinction 
should be believed as existiilg aLuQng aatoms, on the authority of a Yogi who alono can 
coirceive of the distinction. ' On the analogy of this illustration, BC.' 
Others however say :' (he citcs their opiilion) ' i t  is the last, &C.' 
The 
.d Vaiiesilia,g 
say that thcrc are certain ultimate pecu~nrities which are nlnnifcst in the permanent 
sobstairces. It is thus argued. The Yogis who arc absolutely free do not distinguish 
between objects whose genus, positiou in space and seco~ldary qualities arc: the same, 
aud in which there is no iiltervnl ; ailcl caimot specify either by pointing out mutual clifier- 
ewes or by defining their realities. There must, therefore, be some ultimate peculiarity 
(Viiesa) : and it is that, that they make out to be the diffcre~ltiatiug quality of pcrmeneilt 
' 
substances, sach as atoms, &c. 
l 
He refutes this theory :-' Even there, &C.' 
Genus, space and secondary quality have 
, been illustrated. Norm is a manifestation of arrangemellt along certain lines. Thus 
]laying romoved a thiilg whose parts are beautifully arranged, another object whose 
parts arc ugly in arrangement, is placed in the same position when the seer is otherwise 
employed. In this case the knowledge of distinction is obtained by the difference of 
arrangement. 

Or, form may mean the body. It is by relation to the body that the selves whethct 
in evolution or free are distinguished By means of the action of the elements, such as it 
may be. Thus when the notion of distinction is caused aoywhero by other means, it is 
not necessary to posit a differentia iu the shape of ulbiluate peculiarity (Antya Viiep), 
as the cause of the distinction. This is similar to the case of the Dvipas of Kuia and 
Piqkara in their aspect of planes of space. 
Inasmuch as it has beon said that the didorences of genus, position and time, &C., 
are known by the intellect af the ordinary man, it is said that the difference of moment 
of time (keaya) is known by the iutellect of the Yogi alone. The word 'alone ' sigl~ifies 
the difforeilce of the moment of titno, ilot that of the i~ltellect of the Yogi. It is inferred 
that the distinction between released Purusas also is known by the intellect of the Yogi 
by their relation to tho body ~noving in the elcmeuts (Mtachara). 
The teacher thought that in tlie case of those who ao not possess t h e  means of dis- 
tinction, them are no distioctions ill the case of tlla Pradhina. Therefore, he said:- 
, 
' Although destroyed with reference to those whose objects havc been gained, it is 
not destroyed with rcfereilce to others, being colurnoi? to tho others.' 
He says this :-' On account of the abscncc of form, &C.' 
Tlm meaning is that the 
universe has dilfercrico indicated by the causes wentioncd. But there is no distinction 
in the root), thc Pmd1idna.-52. 
SGt1-a 53. 
m, 
Tbrakam, the, intuitional. a S h ,  Snrva-visayam, hariug everything 
(6) 
for ite Sphere oE operation (%m). a h - h q  Snrva th8-viqayaa, (v*) 
having 
a l l  c o i ~ d i t i o ; ~  (h) 
For its sphere of opsmtion. w s q  hkramam, having no 
succession. 
V Cha, and. 
Iti, this. 
53. Arid it is the ii~t~uitional 
; has everything for its 
sphere- of-operat ion ; has all-condition for its sphere-of- 
operation ; has no succession. This is the entire discri- 
minitive 1ino~vleclge.--459. 
dbti whM1cvirmi W @%mmq 
I m&rfk 
em&%- 
tmhmBmb: t &%wi~a~nrfcf I W R p F Z r p ~ " t ~ ~ & :  
I &m- 
fSwm&nrn~~~w' 
& gdi%: 
a~m~cl&: 
I ~ q & a ~ - m ~
6 aht g
:
 
I 3 
m qft@mhi~ 
h * a T  
syrd 
q-419 
maqm * m f i  I1 3 II 
\ 
VYASA. 
It is intuitional:--This 
means that, the 
lrnowleclge comes by 
/ 
one's owl1 prescience and not by teaclling. 
Has evergtl~iig for its sphere of operation :--This 
i~waw that there . 
is nothing yet kriunu, wllicli might not 13e made its object. 
Has all coditioils for its spllere :--The all, as it n .is or will be, or 
is wit11 all minor modes of expression. It means that he knows all the 
conditions of these objects. 
0 

CH. III. 
ON ATTAINMENTS, 159. 
265 
Has no succession :-It means that he takes in the;' all ' as correlat- 
ed to but one moment. 
This is tho entire discrilninative knowledge:--The light of Yoga 
is part of this only, beginning with tshe Madliutnatf up to the end of this 
knowledge.--159. 
e 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
I 
Having thus described one branch of discritnit~atiie knowledge, the author now des- 
cribes discriminative linowlcdge :-'It 
is intuitive ; has everything as the sphere of its 
operation ; has all conditions as its sphere ; has no succession ; this is the entire discrimi- 
native knowledge.' 
' Dis:?riminative howledgc :' This is the statement of tlm thing defined. The rest 
is the description. Intuition is called Thrska, because it bocomss the cause of crossing 
the ocean of the universe. Ho distingi~ishes this from the knowledge by prescience 
already described :-' Has all conclitions for the sphere of its operation.' 
Blodos of expression :' mcms minor tnodes of differentiation. For this reason the 
knowledge of discriu~ination is colopletc. Them is nothing anywhere which may not at 
ally time or in any way be its object. 
This is the meaning. There may. be other know- 
ledge obtained by cognitive trance, but that also is a part of this, and where therefore 
can there be any knowledge beyond t h i s  ? It is for this reason complete. The Commen- 
tator says this :-' The light of Yoga, Le., the Copli t,ire Yoga, is a part thereof.' 
NOW he says what is the beginning allcl wl:at is the c n i  :-'Beginning with the Madhu- 
&C.' 
The truth-bearing cognition is the >Iadhn, honey, becausc it causes, auch 
sweet bliss. Tho meaning is, 'having obtained the puritly of cognition as described.' 
The bladh~~~nati 
is that state which is possessed of that and gives sweet bliss. Tho mind 
having reached that stato, manifests 
to the end of that state, passing through seven- 
fold stages of intellectual progress. I t  is for this reason that discriminative knowledge 
becomes intuitional, inasmuch as its branch, the light of Yoga, is intuitions1.-53. 
tn~-mn%: 
Q 
Sat tvapurosayoh, of the objective eesence and the conscious- 
ness. @ S~tddhi, of the purit,p. 
SGnlye, on their becomiug equal. 
hw, Kaivdyam, absolute independence. 
54. When the purity of the Objective-Essence and 
t 
that of the Purusa become equal, it is absolute indepen- 
dence.- 160. 

VYASA. 
\ 
In the case of him who has obtained discriminative knowledge aa 
well as in the case of him who has not obtained discriminative knowledge, 
it is absolute independence (kaivalya), when the purity of the Objective 
Essence and the Purusa become equal. Wl1en the essence of the Will-to- 
be with the dirt of the Rajas and the Tamas removed, has the notion of 
the distinctness of the Puruga as its sole remaining object, and all the 
seeds of affliction have been bnrnt up, then does it, as it mere, assume a - 
state of purity similar to that of the Puru~a~. In that state the purity of 
the P u r u ~ a  consists in.the absence of that enjoyment which is attributed 
to him, as it were, figuratively. 
I11 that state coines absolute indepen- 
dence (lcaivalya), whether it be to the master or to the ordinary man, 
to him who is possessed of discriminative lznodedge or to him who is 
not, 
EIe in whom the seed of affliction is bnrnt up, has no longer any 
need of kno~vledge anywhere. .It is as the means of purifying the subs- 
tance of the Will-to-be that knowledge and the powers born of trance have 
* 
been touched upon. In reality ignorance is removed bv 
a, knowledge. 
011 
its cessation there are no longer any afflictions. 
When there are no aflic- 
tions, there is no fruition of actions. The Gunas in tllat state have ful- 
filled their object. They, therefore, no longer present themselves to be 
seen by the Purup. Then the Puru5a shining in his own pure light, 
becomes absolutely inclependen t (1revala)-160. 
Having now described the means of absolute inclrpcndei~ce, the Saw yamas together 
with the attainments, the author now introduces this aphorism in order to c;llom t]lat t-0 
knowledge of the distinction between the Objective Essence and the l'urm:~ is the clirect 
means of absolute indepeadcncc :-' In the case of 1li:n who h s  obtained, &C.' 
The mean- 
ing is that the knomledgc born of discrimination clocs, all the same, bccome the means 
absolute independence, whether or not there is the knowlcclgo born of discrimin:ltion. 
' It is absolute independence (knivalyn) when the purity of the Objcctivc Essence and that 
of the Puruga become uc~nal.' - 
L The master' is he who has by the pcrformancc of S:tmynma obtained the power of 
knowledge and action. The ordinary man is ho who has not obtained these powers. To 
him who is possessed of discrio~inative knowledge by the performance of Snmya~na des- 
cribecl just before, or, t o  another who has obtained knowledge otl~ermise, in either case, 
the attainmellts are never under requisition for the purpose. ' ~ I c  in whom the seeds of 
affliction, &C.' 

m. 
I I f .  
ON ATTAINMENTS, 160. 
267 
f 
Well, but if they are nnnecessary for absolntoe freedom their teaching is useless. 
For this reason the Commentator says :-'As a means of the attainment of the purity of 
the 0 
bjective Essence, &C.' 
The attainments are not absolutely unnecessary in athining abso1at.e independence. 
They are not its direct moans. The knowledgo born of discrimination and that which is 
obtained by the successive performance of Samyama is only an indirect cause. The 
principal cause is the knowledge of distinction. This is tho meaning. Ignorance is 
removed by knowledge. Knowledge means the Highest Intellection.--54. 
In this chapter the cliroct means of Yoga have been described. Also the evolutionary 
changes have been dilated upon. Also the conjunction with the elements by Samyama. 
Also the knowledge born of discrimination. This is the third chapter of VACHASPATIS 
GLOSS on Vylsa's Commentary of the aphorisms of Yoga. The third Chapter, the Chapter 
On Attainments, is finished. 

THE FOURTH C'HAPTI!IEC. 
ON BBSOLUl'E INDEPENDENCE (ICAIVALYA)." 
Janmn, i
t
 
f
i
 
Bugadhi, drugs. sm Siaotrx, incantations. m: 
Tapab, purificatory rites, m& Sambdhi, trance. 
W: J&b, born. 
3
:
 Siddha- 
yab, attainmen te. 
Attainments by birth exist in the body. 
By chugs, ill the *housss of the Asuras, by- elixir and such like : 
By incantations, motion in space and the powers of attenuation 
By purificatorv 
W act.ion (tapas) the achievement of wishes. He takes 
such forms and goes to such places as he may like, and does other similar 
things. 
The attainments born of trance lmre been described.--1 61. 
- 
V.&CHASPATJ'S GLOSS. 
Now tranco, its means and its attainments, hare bcon descrilled chiefly in tlhe first, 
second and third chapters. 0 t h ~ ~  
subjects which it became necesswy to take up by 
context, or by way of introduction, l~ave also been cliscussed 
Hcre is to be discussed 
Absolute Freedom (Kaivaba), which is the ultilnate of all these practices, &c. And this 
is impossible to explain without explaining tlio nature of the mind inclining towards 
the state of absolute independence, as also the other world and the self which being 
something beside knowledge alone ( V  
j fi 5 : '  is rclatcd to the other world, and which 
enjoys through the instru~nontality of thc mind, pleasuralk sound, &c. All this has to 
be described in this chapter, besidos what might become lleccssary by context or by 
way of introduction. 
First of all, he describes the five -fold ntt:hmcnt, with the ohjoct of ascertaining 
which of the minds possessed of attainments is passing towards the statc of absolute 
independence. 
'The attainments are by birth, incantations, purificatory action or trance.' 
IIo 
explains :--Exists in the body :-Some 
one has the power of attenuation in the body, 
just as he is born because actions done by him as man, which are calci~lated to cause 
the enjoyment8 of Heaven, have developed them into fruition in some heavenly region. 

\ 
. 5 2. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE$162. 
&d 96D 
/ 
- 
h e  describes the attainments due to drags :-'In 
the h o ~ ~ s e s  
of the Asurarr.' 
Man 
Pyi&s to the places of the Asuros for some reason. He is met there by lovely Asura 
damsels, and given an offering of elixir. Using that he comes to possess the attainments 
of freedom from decay and death, and other attaiments. Or, the same may take place 
even here by the use of elixir, as in the case of the thinker Mindavya, who resided in 
the Yindhya Mountains and who used the elixir, 
He next describes the attainments due to incantations :-' By mantras.' 
He next describes the attainments of purificatory actions :--'By purificatory action.' 
Ile nest describes the attainment of wishes :-Assuming 
such forms as desired. 
Whatever does he desire, be it the attainment of A?iuli or any other, that he attains at 
once. Whatever he desires to hear or to think anywhere, that he hears or thinks there. 
By tho word, &Q., seeing, Bio., have been included.--l. 
mvm JBtyantars, to another li fe-state. &m: 
ParipBmab, change. 
Pmkdti, of the creative causes. ~ p ,  
Apdr&t, by the filling up. 
2. Change to another life-state by the filling up of 
the creative causes (Prakyityiip~ra),~l62. 
Here 'change to another life-state 5y the filling up of the creative 
causes,' takes place of the life-state into which the body and the powers 
have already changed and exist. On the former change going out 
comes the close appearance of their next change by the sequential showing 
forth of organ and parts which did not exist before; and the creative 
causes of the body and the Fowers fayour each their own modifications 
by filling up, which again has the necessity of virtue, &C., as the incidental 
cause (of removing the impediment).-162. 
V~~CHASPATI'S 
GLOBS. 
. 
The attainments clue to the trance have, been described in the previous chapter. 
It is now desirable to say that the change into another life-state brought about 
the 
four classes of attainmellts dae to the use of herbs, &C., is also of the same body and the 
powers thereof. This, however, does not come about by mere material causes. The 
materid itself, so far as it goes, does not prove to be competent to inteneify or weaken 
the state of the divine and the not-diviue, in him. It is plain that acause having no 
elements of difference in itself cannot operate to produce different effects. Tn order to 
guard against the possibility of the change being taken as due to accident alone, he 
completes and reads the aphorism :-' change to another life-state by the filling up of 
the creative causes.' 
Here it is only the change of the body and the powem as they are in one state, 
that 3akes place into those suitable to another state. The change takes place of the body 

and the powers as they appear in man, into the life-state of the animals and gods by the 
filling up of the creative causes. 
The creative causes of the body are the elements of Ppithvi, &e. The creative cause 
of the ' powers ' is the principle of egoism. 
' Billing up ' means the sequential showing forth, entrance therein, of these taus es 
By this comes about t h e  change. 
Says this : --' By the for~ncr change going out, &C.' 
Well, but if the change is favoured by the ' filling up ' why does it not take place 
always ? For this reason he says :--b 
Has the necessity of virtue, &c. 
By this llave been described the changes of the state of the body into childhood, 
boyhood, youth, old age ; the change of the seed of the Nyagrodhs into the tree ; the 
change of the small piece of fire thrown into e heap of straw, into a large fire throwing 
out flames by thousand and embracing the sky itself.-2. 
fthaPi;ir+i a*i;ir 
m-;tg33 aa: +%mq 11 3 11 
ffb, 
Nimittarn, incidental causes. -, 
A prayojakam, are those which 
do not move into action. mnm, Praliritinkm, the creative causes. 
W Vsrapa, 
of the obstacle. 
95: Bhedah, piercing through. 9 Tu, but. m: Tatah, from 
tbat. W. Ksetrikavat, like a husbandman. 
. 
3. The 
creative-causes are not-moved-into-action , 
by any incidental-cause ; but that pierces-the-obstacle from 
it like the husbandman.-163. 
VYASA. 
The incidental causes in the shape of virtue, &c.,'do not move the- 
II 
creative causes into action ; because the cause is not moved into action 
by the effect. How then? ' That pierces the obstacle like the husband- 
man.' 

CH. V 
3. ON ABSOLUTE TA7DEPENDEh7CE, 163. 
271 
A s ,  the husbandman desirous of carrying water from an already 
well-filled bed to another, does not clmw the w t e r  with his own hands 
to places which are on the same or a lower level ; but sinqply removes 
the obstacles, and thereupon the water flows clown of itself to the other 
bed, so it pierces througll viqe which is the obstacle to virtue, aud that 
being pierced through, the crontive causes pass through their respective 
changes. 
Or, similarly, the same husbandman does not possess the power of 
transferring the earthy and watery juices to the roots of rice in the same 
becl. 
What then ? He weeds the ' ring, ' the ' Gavendllulra ' and the 
' sybnlaka ' out of the common bed, and when they have been weeded 
out, the juices tllemselves enter the roots of rice. 
Similarly virtne onlv 
* becornes the cause of the removal of the vice, 
because purity and impurity are diametl-icall y opposed to each other. 
It is not that virtue becomes the canse of the creativo causes moving 
int.0 action. 
On this point Naadidvarn, &C., 
are illustrations. 
.-- 
On the 
other side, too, vice counteracts virtue and thence comes the change to 
impurity. Here too Naliuqa, the Ajagarn, 
&C.; 
should be taken as 
ill ustrations.--163. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. ' 
It has bee11 snid, By tlle filling up of the creative causes. ' Here the doubt arises. 
Is this filling up of t l ~ o  creative causes natorsl, or due to some incidental cause such as 
virtue alld vice ? W hat is prorccl ? 1 
because 'the creative causes, not wi tlistanding 
cristence, fill up only sometimes, * and l~ccausc it is said that virtue and vice we t h e  
incidental causes ; it is, therefore, proved that virtue, &C., arc the incideutal causes of the 
creative canses lnoving into action. Bor this rcasou he says :-' The creative causes are 
not morcd into action by any incidental cause; that pierces the o:xhctlc like the 
husbandman. ' 
l 
It is true that virtue, &C., are the incidental cmscs, but they do not set the creativo 
causes into action ; because virtue and vice are tliemselvcs the effects of creative causes. 
And the effect does not more thc cause into action, becmse the birth of the olfect 
&pending upon the cause, it is subject to thc action of the causc. Wliat is self-depcnclent 
can only set an action in, something mliich is dependent 011 it. The jar which is desired 
to be made or which has already bccn made, cannot certainly use tlle clay, tlle ~vhccl 
and water for that por1)ose without the 1)ottcr. Nor is i t  similarly tllc object of the 
Purusa that S C ~ S  the creativo canscs into action. It is only isyaps who does t,llis wit11 
that object in vicw. The object 0 the Purugn is snid to be the power ~ ~ l l i c h  
sets ill 
action, by virtue of its being the aim thereof. Further, if it vcre so, the tcnding of the 
aim of the 1'nrog:i towards fdfillmnt would rcry ppop6rly 13ccomc the causc of tlio 
stopping of the operations of the phenomenal world.--3. 
But it is not by this m
~
h
 
that virtue. QC., ccnsc to be tllo means of cllnngc altogcthrr. 
\ 
Because they becotnc the m c m s  of effecting chnngcs even by rcmo~iilg the obstnclcs 
only, like tllc ilosbandman. As to a 
His action too sllo~ld bc undcbrstoocl to 110 
of t h c  ilatnrc of the removal of o!~stacles, so tint rirl no nln y bc prnrtiscd. Tllis is 
what has been c~nin~elltcd 
upon by t h r  Comn~entar;: n!rcndy cs1,l:tiilcil. 

PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
f?sh Nirmbpa, of creation, created. 
fimR Chittbni, minds. ~~ Asmitii, 
from egoism. W? MktrfLt, alone. 
4. 
Created minds proceed* from egoism alone. --l@&. 
- 
aa: uhae wa~3Rr 1 o II 
VYASA. 
When however the Yogi makes Inany bodies, then, are these bodies 
possessed of many rni~icls or all of one mind only ? ' Created minds pro- 
m 
ceecl from egoism a l o ~ ~  
? ' ~ n l r i n g  ss cause the lniild which is egoistn 
alone, he makes the created minds. Thence do the bodies become pos- 
sessed of minds.- 164. 
V~CHASPATI~S 
GLOSS. 
NOW he considers the unity or mn~lifoldncss of tile minds in tlie mmy bodies made by 
perfected powers, after the attnimnc~lt~s 
halve bocll achieved by the filling in of the crea- 
tive causes (Prak ri tis) : -' When lio~~cvcr. 
' 
Here if the bodies possessed ~llorc tllnn ono mind, the desiro of oacli such mind would 
be differerlt from those of tlm otllcrs ; and t!loro would not thus be obedience to the 
rlesirod of one mind and no mntoality in relationship, just as in the case of two individual 
selves (Puraps). Itb, tllercfore, comes to this that it is only one mind which pervades 
morc created bodies tlml one, just nq t!~c light of a lamp is diffused on all sides and illu- 
minates moro bodies than one, Says ha tlmreupon :--i Crested minds proceed from egoism 
alone.' 
All living bodies, as long as tliey livc, are found to bc possessed of one ordinary mind 
each. Tako, for example, thc bodios of Ctlaitr;~ aud Msitra, etc. So are the created 
bodies (the NirrnB!~akLyas). Thus isit proved that each of these bodies has a mind of its 
own. 
Says with this in mind :-' Taki:lg AS canso tho mind which is egoism alone. '-4. 
SOtra 5. 
aph, Pravgi t ti, of 
activity. 
3 
Bhede, there boi ng di Bercnce. 
ddrq~, 
Pray~jakam, the director. i;mq Chittam, the mind. wiy Eiram, one. 
3 1 7 3 ~ ~
Aneke~Bm, of the many. 
5. There being difference of activity, one mind 
the director of-the-many .-165. 
How may it be that inany minds may fullow in their activities, the 
desires df one millcl ? TVi th this ohjec t he makes oi-le mi i:d as the director 
of all the minds ; and theuce proceecls the difference of. nctivi ties.465. 

C
.
 TV. S 6. 03' ABSOLUTE IXDEPFR7DER'CE, 166. 
273 
- 
- 
--P 
4 
V ~ ~ H A S P A T I ' S  
GLOSS. 
The aphoris~u is n reply to what has bcen said, that in the case of there being moiaO 
minds than onc, there would not he obedicncc to on:: ~n illcl, nor mitt lie1 ity of ~ e l n  
t~ionship :-- 
' Therc being dilfercilcc of activity, one mind t h e  director of the otllers. ' This migilt he 
a defect if tllc Yogi clid not make one mind to bc the director of morc minds thall one 
acting in more bodies t h m  o i ~ .  W h e n  tliat is luadc, no defect rcmains. 
It shduld not be said that there is 110 use in ~~~lorc 
minds than onc that is one for cach 
body, when one sucli mind is posited ; nor sliould it be said that there is 110 use in makix~g 
a directing mind, because one's own mind can serve that purllose. The reasoll is that 
that which has been proved t o  exist by right reasniling, need no more bc subjected t o  the 
test of being placed i ti ocnsoiinnt ailcl dissonant posit ions. 
On this says the I ' u r i p  :-' Tllc oile Lord bccoines mmy by his power of Lordship. 
For this reason and because having 1;ccomo rnmy he again becoll~es one, these are'certain- 
ly born by the differences of the mind, one-fold, t.n-o-fold, three-fold anr! manifold. The 
Yogiivars makes his bodies i11 this way a n d  uinmokes them. By some he enjoys objects of 
enjoyment slid by other performs hard penaqceu. Hc :]gain draws in t h e  bodies as the Sun 
' 
draws in his ray. ' Ib is wit h thiu object that he says :--' How is it that all these minds 
act accarding, &c. '-5. 
SOtt-a G. 
I 
TT WW3WSTVqFT I\ 6 II 
?. 
an Tntra, of these. 
wsnq DhyBmjarn, the meditation born. 
An&- 
, - 
dayam, is free from the vehicles. 
6 
Of 
these the meditation-born is free-from-the- 
vehicles.-166. 
a3 sqtqarwrnsq I waR6 R$iiimi$ci 
&ahwmvum&5i11: 
r-9 
qR I m q%q 
h+ aqsnrari a&-a v w r d r  nsrfix%@: 
as: y m m r h ~ ~ w . ~ :  
qinrn$nxdrm & 11 g II 
. 
V Y ~ S A .  
I 
The created mind is five-fold, as said :-' The a ttahments are by 
birth, drugs, incnntatious, purificatory action or trance. ' Of these the one 
that is born of meditation is alone free from the vehicles. It does not 
possess the vehicles, w l k h  cause the manifestation cf desire, &c. 
Thenco 
is there no coming into relationsl~ip wit11 virtue and vice, inasmuch as 
tile aMictiow of a Yogi have ceased to exist.--166. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Now he determines the mind, which tends to einancipation, out of the five Jescrip- 
tions of the minds of tho perfected ones (siddliiis), which have been described :-' The 
mcditstiou-born is free from the whiclgs.' 
The whicles are those that take possession' 
o f  the wincl :S t h e  ilnpressions of the actions ai@ the impressions of t h e  afflictions. The 
mi11c1 free frcm the rehicles is that in ~ ~ h i c . 1 1  
these do not exist. The meaning is that i t  
hccomcs iiwlinetl t o ~ m r d s  m:ancip:~tion. Inns~mcll a s  there -does riot exist in this con- 
tlitiori t h e  mnnifest at ioll of' desires, &C., there is no conling into relationship with virtue 
:rlld vice. But tlicn ~ - h y d o  
~iot clcsircs, &C., come into manifestation? For this reason 
ko says :--' Eecaase the afliic tioils of a \ <#gi 
! :IYC ctascd to exist. '-0. 
35 

274 
P ~ T A N J A L I ' S  YOGA. 
V Y ~ S A .  
The vehicle of actions exists, in the case of others. IIence, 'A Yo- 
gi's karma is neither white nor black ; of the others it is three-fold. ' 
This class of actions has four locations : the black, tllc Llack-white,, 
the white, nor white uor black. 
Of these, the black is of tlle wicked. 
The black-white is brought about by external means, as in this the ye- 
hicle of actions grows by m a n s  of causing pain to, or acting kiiiclly to- 
wards others. 
The white is of those who resort to the meails 01 improrement of 
etudy and meditation. This is dependent up011 the luincl alone. It does 
b 
not depend upon external means ancl is llotl, therefore, brought about by 
mj uring others. 
who hare renounced everything (the Sanny his), w l m e  amictious hare 
been destroyed, a d  wlmse present body is the last one, they miil have. 
It is not white in the case of a Yogi, because he gives up the fruit of 
action ; and it is not black, because he does not perform actions. 
Of 
the other creatures, it is of the three fonner clescriptious o~ly.-lGi. 
V A C H ~ P A T I ~ S  
GLOSG. 
Says that the others are possessed of the vehicles, with the object of showing the 
differences of the other minds from the. medit-ation-born, which is not possessed of the 
vehicles : -' In the case of others, &C. 
S 
In the salus coimeotioll he introduces the aphorism as describing the cause t h e r e  
of:--'A Yogi's karma is neither black nor white ; of t&e others it is three-fold.' 

CB. V 
S 8, ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 168, 
Has four locations '-Location 
means place (of manifestation). ?t has four 1 0 ~ r  
tions because i t  mmifests in four such places. 
Brought about by external moa ns '--In 
all such cases in jury is sure to be canaid 
to others. It is not that even in action done for the preparation of barley, &C., for food, 
&C., there exists no injury. It is possible that ants, &C., might be killed at the time of 
pounding (;hem, and finally t h e  arrangement is that trunk, &C., are produced by the d e  
struction of seeds as such. 
' Acting kindly ' means the favonring of BrPhmays, &C., by giving them p?-esents, &C. 
The white is of those who are not SanayBsis, but who perform purificatory action, 
study and meditation. Ho shows how it is white :L' 
This is dependent upon the mind 
alone, &C.' 
That which is neither white nor black, is t h e  karma of the Sannylsis (those who 
have renounced everytlling. He shows who are the Sannyjsis :--l Whose afflictions have 
been destroyed, &c. V 
Those who have renounced actions (the karma-sannyiisis) are not anywhere found 
performing actioils which depend upon external means. They have not got tho black vehicle 
of actions, because they do not perform such actions. Nor do they possess the white 
t 
vehicle of actions, becausc they dcdicate to iivnra the f r u i t s  of the vehicle of action 
b ~ ~ n g h t  
about by the practice of Y o g . ~  That whose frnit is not bgd, is called white. 
That which has ao fruit itself, how can it have ally bad fruit ? 
Having thus described tlic four-fold division of karma, now he specifies which refem 
to which :-' Of these it is not white, &C.'-7. 
m: Tat,ah, thence. q Tacl, their (of resitlunl potencies). h 
Vipbka, 
frui :ion. ww 
Q .Inu,a:~~n, 
following. h v ~ q w q  
Vi pllrbnugug Bnam, of those that 
are competent to bring about their fruition. 
W Eva, only. ~~~~: 
Abhivyaktib, 
the manifests tion, proceedi ng. -, 
VAsnnbn $m, of the residual potencies. 
8. Thence proceed tlhe residual-potencies comp- 
wrmf3mfk8ftrff' &v& 
I 
q q ~ g ~ w  
~ara m w&t I 
WTd&& z qm 
~9~;iria$: 
II C II 
VYASA. 
' T!lence ' rnenns from the three-fold karma. 
6 Competent to bring abot~t the fruition tlweof.' 
Whatever is the 
fruition of whichever class of karma, such residual potencies only as are 
competent to bring about the f raition of those actions, are manifested. 
When the lrarrm ~ e l a t i u g  tlo the state of the gods is fructifying, the resi- 
'lun mllich are adequate to the state of the hell-born, the animals and men 
cannot manifest. 
On the contrary, it is only the irnpressious which are 

276 
PATAN J A  LZ'S YOGA. 
adequate to the state of the gods that are manifested. 
The operation of 
the rule is the same i n  the case of the hell-born, the human ancl the ani- 
mal tendencies.- 168. 
V&~HASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Having ascertained the,vehicle of actions, now he describes the developments of 
the vehicle of afflictions :--' Thence manifested the residual potencies competent to bring 
about their fruition.' 
He describes the impressions which are competent to bring 
about the life-state, life-experioncc and life-period, whether hellish or divine, which are 
the results of the fruition of good and bad karma : -' The 
potencies competent 
to bring about the. fruition thereof.' 
The residua which are born of divine experience 
a= competent to bring about the fruition of divine karma. It is not possible that in tho 
case of the manifestation of the residua of hnman esperiences, the enjoyment of t h e  
fruitage of divine actions should take place. For this reason the impressions whose 
manifestation is brought about by karma are of the same class as the fruition thereof. 
This is the meaning of the Commentary.- 8 
Jlti, of life state. k Deda, of locality. 
IWa, of time. m f i i ,  
VyavahitBndm, these being distinct. 
qfi Api, even. . W W ~ T  
Anantaryam, sequen- 
tial non-interruption. v% 
Smyi ti, of memory. W%: 
Bnmskarayoh, and of poten- 
tial residue. m
r
?
 Elcarfipatvfit, because of their being the same in appearance. 
9. Memory and potentiid-resiclua being the same in 
appearance, there is sequential non-interruption, even when 
there is distinction of life-state, locality and time.-169. 
~
~
~
~
r
n
l
r
r
i
c
l
c
n
~
~
~
 
*av6R%T?Wmmp I !pRi**- 
The rise of fruition in the shape of s cat takes place by virtue of 
tile powers competent to show them forth. Ever) if that rise is separated 
even by a hundred life-states, or by distance in space, or by a hundred 

CB. IV 
9. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 169. 
l 
Italpas, it will rise whenever it does, by the operation of its own appro- 
priate cause. 
Thus will it appear again by taking up the resitha which 
are present in the mind on account of the experience of the feline state 
in some former life. W h y ?  Because even ifthere beaninterval be- 
tween them, the residua are manifested by the similar manifesting karma 
becoming the operative cause thereof. 
Thns there is hnt sequential 
appearance. 
A ncl for what other reason ? *Because memory and resir! ual 
potency are but one in appearance. 
As are the experiences, such are the 
I 
residuai potencies ; and they are of the nature of the rcsidns OF actions. 
And memory is similar to the residna. 
Memory comes by the residual 
l 
potencies sepmn ted therefz-on1 by life-state and by time an:l space. 
From 
memory come again residr~al potencies. 
Thns it is that memory and 
residual potency are manifested by virtue of the vehicle of action coming 
into mani fes-tntion. Thus even tliough separated in time, c
,
 there- is 
sequentid non-i n te~*i*upt~i 
on, inasmuch ;IS the r e l ~ t  
ion of cause and effect 
does not break. 
i, 
The Vhnnas (aroma) are residr~al potencies, the vehicles.-169. 
. 
Let that be. But, when the state of a cat is put on after the dentth of a man, 
it must be due to the manifestation of t h e  resiclrra of tllc hnman stlatc of esistence, in- 
asmuch as t,he nns immediately follows the other. 
T t  is not possible that the experience 
of the day immediately proceding be not remembered, hut that the experiences of an- 
other clay more distant therefrom he ?emembered. For this reason he says :--'There 
is sequential non-interrn~t~ion, 
even when there is separation in time, life-state and space, 
on account of the molnorv and residt~nl potency being t h e  same in appearmce.' There 
may be separation in life-state, &C., from the life of a. cat. Still there is non-interruption 
on account of the fruit thereof, because the same memory is generatecl when the mani- 
festation is according to its own fruit and in consonance with karma which must fr~lctify 
into file feline state. 
L The rise of a state ' is the vehicle of action, because i t  is from 
this state that the fruition arises. Further i t  takes its rise in accordance with its own 
manifesting cause. 
' Manifestation ' means tending towards the beginning of fruition. 
Thns will it rise again by taking up the residila which are, &C.' 
The meaning is 
that if it does manifest, i t  would manifest by taking up the resiclua which manifest its 
own fruition. 
Having established the absence of interruption through the operation of the cailse, 
now ha establishes the same through the operation of the offect :-g 
And for what other 
reason ?' 
Ono in appearance ' means similarity. He says the same :--' As are the experi- 
ences, &C.' 
The question is that if the experiences are of the same appearance as the residual 
potencies, then inasmuch as the experiences are seen disappearing very soon, the 
potencies also must be taken as disappearing very soon. Thnt bcing t h e  case, how is it 
possible that the potencies, hehg subject to speedy dispersion, should be competent to- 
bring about experiences, after a great 1apse:of time ? 

278 
PATANJA LZ'S YOGA. 
For this reason he says :-'Ancl 
they arc of t h e  nature of tlho rcsidna of actions.' 
As the new rcsiduum brought about 11y momentary action is p ~ r m ~ i l e n t ,  
SO also is the 
potency generated by momentary experience. There must alwnys he some difference in 
similarity. If it were otllerwise nlld there were no difference, there v-ould be no simi- 
larity. The rest is easy.-9. 
Thsbm, for them. W @ ~ T  
AnBdi tvmn, no beginning. 
B Ch3, and. ~ h :
Aiisah, of the desire to live. 6iqi.n; Nityntvbt, owing to the eternity. 
10. And there is no-1)eginning for them, the desire- 
to-live being eternal.--- l TO. 
VYASA* 
(" 
There is no beginning for them, the residua, inasmuch as the 
desire are ever present. The desire, ' Would that. I may not cease to 
be,' ' Would that I may lire on,' is f o l d  in everybody. This self- 
benediction is not, inherent,. MThy not ? How could there be fear of 
death and desire to avoid pain, in any being who has only been born, 
if he has had no experience of liability to. death, it being understcod that 
* desire to avoid anything is only caused by remembrance suffered in 
consequence thereof; and that nothing which is inherent in anything 
stands in need of a cause. The mind, therefore, possessed as it is of 
\ 
residua from eternity, brings into activity by the operation of exciting 
causes, certain residua only, for the purpose of giving experience to the 
Purusa. 
I 
. 
Some philosophers say that the mint1 has only a form which is com- 
mensurate with the body nith which it may, for the time, be connected ; 

CR. IV. 6 
c 10. ON ABSGLUTE 
I 
Ih7DEPENDENCE, 170. 
279 
it contracts or expande li4e light placed in a j.ar or a house as the case 
might be. 
And thus they say that non-interruption and repeated are 
'\ 
proper. 
The author lloldq that it is the manifestation dope of the 
self-existing mind that expands or contractls, and that it is this wllich 
has the necessity of the opvtation of the exciting causes of virtue, &c. 
-, 
These exciting causres are two-fold, external and internal. The 
external are those that stahd in need of body, &C., as instrument, ~ u c h  
as 
praising, giving of chaaity, and the performance of obeisance$. The 
internal are those that stand in need of the mind alone, such as fr d ith, &c. 
And so it has been- said t-' 
These acts of friendliness, &C., are tl* 
sports 
of the thinkers; they do not from their very nature depen$ upon ex- 
ternal causes, and cm$e the expression of the highest virtu6 
/- 
* 
Of these two deans the mental. ones are more X powerfi 
How ? 
What can excel kuawledge and desirelessness? Who can without the 
power of the mind, render the Dandaka forest empty, or d&k the ocean 
like Agastya, by khe mere action of the mind alone ?-l 70. 
It may bc m-5. The rcsidaa laid by in a former and yet again in n former life map 
manifest the17~cr;elvos. 
i f  there be authority for the cristence of 'previous and further 
previons ?if& 
39t there is 110 authority for such n. proposition. Merely the pleasure 
and psi3 felt by a cmatuiBo jast born cannot be accepted as ~uthorit~y, 
because that 
can 
explained by taking it to be natural, like the budding and opening of a lotus flower. 
F u r  this rc;tsm 11:) says :--'And there is no beginning for them, the desire to live 
being c ternal.' 
Tlre meaning of 'and' is that the residua are not only m-interrupted in their 
fruition, but thej- arc? ctcrnnl as well, bocawa self-benediction, the desire to live is 
ever-present. Solf-benediction does not fall short of eternity, on account of the residua 
bcing c ternal. 
But inasmuch as this is established by taking them to be inherent, Bhe eternity of 
self-benediction is not established. 
For this reason he says :-' Tho self-benediction, &C.' 
The unbeliever asks :-' W h y  ? ' The answer is :-' Of the creaturc who is just born, 
&C.' For this very reason, how shoold i t  bc that a child who has not experienced his 
liability to death 111 the present life, who does not know, that is to say, from the ex- 
perience of the present life that death also is a char~cteristic of his, sbould, as he may- 
be falling sway from the mother's lap, begin to tremble and hold with his hands tightly 
the ilecklnce hanging on lrer breast, marked with tbc suspicious discus, &c ? And how 
is it that such a child should experience the fear of death, which can bnly be caused by 
the memory of the pain consequent upon aversion to death, whose existence is inferred 
by the trembling of the child. 
Well, has it not been said that this is inherent aml natural ? 
For this reason he says :-l 
Anything that is inherent, does not stand in need of an 
operating cause for its birth.' 
This is the meaning. Such a trembling as becomes visible 
in the child must he due to fear, just like oui own trembling of the same description. 
The fear of the child must be taken to have been caused by the memory of aversion and 

pain, for the reason that it is fear just like our own, and the fear due to expected 1 0 8 s ~  
that might be coming, is not brought about by the mere memory of pain. Further, from 
wliatcver one is afraid, he infers to be the cause of some loss, and then expects that 1088 
would even now eatwe pain. For this reason pain is caused by the aversion brought about 
by tho memory of pain.- Remembering that he infers t h e  cause of pain, which is of the 
same class which is being felt at the time. The child, however, has not in the present life 
experienced the pain of falling in any other place. Nor has that sort of pain been felt. 
Theuce the experience of a former life only remains as the explanation, by the canon of 
r&dues. 
And this is thus applied. The memory of the child just born is duo to the experienoe 
of former lives, because otherwise it would not be memory. It acts just like our own 
memory. Even the budding and opening of a lotus is not inherent, because what ie 
iul~crent in anything, does not stand in need of any other cause for its manifestation. 
Even fire stands in need of other causes for the manifestation of its heat. In the samo 
way, the cause of the opening of a lotus flower is the contact from outside of the rays 
of the rising sun : ancl the cause of the shutting up of the petals is t h e  residual potency, 
which maintains the inactivity. Similarly t h e  happiness of a baby which ia inkrred 
from smiles, etc., should also be considered a proof of a previous lifo. 
An exciting cause ' is action just in point a t  the time of fruition. 
Bringing into 
operation,' means manifests tion. 
As the context demands, he mentions the opposite theory of tho mind having a 
meamre, with the object of refutiog it :-' The miqd contracts and expands like light in a 
jar or a place, etc.' 
Seeing that action takes place only where the body is found to be, there is no 
antliority for the existence of the mind at any place outside the body. The mind further 
is llot atomic in size, because in that case it would moan the simultaneous nowproduction 
of the five sorts of sensation when the large cake is clevoured. Further there is no 
justification for adopting the theory that t!lere is r succession in the case of these 
sensations, and that they are not being felt' simultaneously. No such thing ie eeen. 
One atomic mind cannot be competent to come into relationship with the sensations 
located in more places than one. Hence the only theory that remaius is that, the mind 
is of the dimensions of the body it inhabits, like the light of lamp which is confined either 
to a jar or a palace. Contraction and expansion of the mind in the bodies of an ant and 
an eleph~nt manifest themselves therein. 
The opposite theorists thus say that the 
form, i. c, 
the dimensions of the mind am the same ae those of the body. 
The question arisce that if it be so, how can it come into contact with the seed and 
the field? It does not certainly go out of the dead body without any support, to come 
into> contact with the germ aud sperm cells in the bodies *of the parents, being dependent 
it is for its actions upon others. The shadow of a pillar and auch otber things does 
not move if the things themselves do not move. Nor do the pictures disapperlr, when 
the picture cloth comes in. This being 80, there would not be evolation of eonls through 
births and deaths (8agstira). 
For this reason he says :--' For this rearion the absence of interruption and for that 
reason $a~@ra is proper.' 
And further, if there were a measure for it like that of the body, then the leaving of 
the former body and the taking up of the other body would be secured for it, by taking 
in the interval another body which would serve for it as a vehicle for the intermediato 
spaoe. It is of course along with this vehicle that it moves in the other body. 80 also 
says the PurQa :-' The Yama drew out of the body with tome the Purnsa of the size oi 

CZZ. IV. 
10. 
ON ABSOLUTE IYDEPENDENCE, 170. 
281 
the thumb.' 
This then is the meaning of the absence of interval (Antara). And for this 
~ 
reason evolution by repeated birth is proper. 
Not agreeing with this view, the author states his own theory :-'It is the manifest%- 
, 
tion alone of thesclf-existing mind that contracts and expands.' The ticharp (author) here 
, 
is the Svayambhu. 
The doubt here is that if the mind cannot move into another body without some 
vehicle to support it on its war, how is it that it enters t h t  intermediate vehicle itself ? 
If another body is posited for that purpose also, then there would be no stopping any- 
whore. Nor is it possible that the pind should go out of the body along with the inter- 
mediary vehicle, because it is unclorstood to tske up the intermodiory vehicle after it 
has left the previous body. 
In that case let us posit a subtle body, existing permanently from the beginIling of 
creation up to the Great Lattoncy. It would then be that this subtle body would 
remain in the physical bocly, and it is along with this that tho mind would enter the 
bodies appropriate to the difforcnt regions from the Satyaloka down to the Avichi. ~t 
would further be proper to spcak of this body as bcing drawn out, because that being 
permanent, the difficulty of providing for an interval would also disappear. 
But then there is no authority for such 3 proposition, that s subtle body of thi$ 
description exists. It is certainly nob visible to the senses. Nor can it be inferred as a 
necessity of evolution by passing from one body to another, because that &in be explained 
even on thc tlreory of the author. As to the verbal authority cibecl, the texts speak of the 
being drawn out of the P u r u p ,  not of the mind, nor of a subtle body, but of the self. 
The self, however, the power of consciousness is non-tmnsferable from one place to another. 
This drawing out, therefore, is to bo described as being spoken of in a metaphorical sellse. 
bud thus the drawing out of the mind or of consciousness means wherever it may be, the 
absence of manifestation. It does not mean anything else. 
We allow what has been said in the PurBps, the Itihasas and the Smpitis about the 
mind coming after doath possess the body of a Preta (departed spirit) and also the 
releaso from that Preta body by the performance of the ceremonies of Sapinrlikarana, 
. . 
etc. But we do uot submit to that body being the intermediary vehicle. There is no 
authority in the Vedas for the existence of such an intermediary vohiclc. What happens 
is that the mind takes up the body of a Preta, and is therein taken away by the men ~f 
4 
Yams ; not that this body serves as t h c  iotcrmediary vehicle. For this reason, tho mind 
being of the nature of the principle of individuality, and that principle like Ak&& in all 
tho three woilds, the mental principle is all-pervading. 
If this be so, then its functioning also must bo all-pervading, and this would mean 
that the mind is onmiscient. Bor this reason, has it been said, that the xnanifestation 
done of this all-pervading principle is liable to contract or expand. 
us grant that, but then bow is it that the contraction and erpan3ion of the 
manifestatioll of the mind ta?ce place only now and then. For this reason be says :-' And 
the mind has need of virtue and vice.' 
Divides the cause of the manifestation :--' And the cause is two-fold.' 
I 
By the, L &C.,' in body, &C., the senses and wealth, Be., are meant. 
L Faith, &C. ' : -Here too energy, memory, &C., are to be understood. 
Mentions the consensus of opinion of the h
h
 gryas, on the question of intermedia- 
tion : 
--L As has been said.' 
Vihgra means aetivity (Vy&pAra). 
.l 
The highest virtue ' means the white Karma. 
' of the two : -out of the internal and external. 
mowledge and desicales3oe3j : -The Dharsa born of these is nndergtood here. 
l 
36 

282 
PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
By what ? This means by what Dharma brought zbou t by external means. It is 
knowledge and desirelessness alone that overpower these, i.e., destroy their seed-power. 
This is the meaning. 
5* 
He mentions in this case the well-known ill~strdAon.-~ The Datldaka forest empty.'--l(]. 
SCltra r I .  
Q Hetu, cause. W Phala, motive. mm A~rqm, substratum. 
hlambana, 
object by all these four. m. 
Ramgrihltatvbt, being held together. 
Eshm, 
of them ~3 
Abldixe, on the disappearance. q Tad, of them. m: Abhlvab, 
disappearance. 
11. Being held together by Cause, Motive, Substra- 
tum and Object they 
W 
disappear on-the-disappearance of- 
these.--171. 
vy;isn. 
The cause :-By 
virtue comes pleasure, hv 
V 
vice pain. 
From plea- 
sure comes attachment ; from pain aversion. Thence cdrnes effort. There- 
by, actinghy mind, body and speech, one either favours or injures others. 
Thence cotne again virtue and vice, pleasure and pain, attachment and 
aversion. Thus it is that revolves the six-spoken wheel of the world. 
And tire driver of this wheel is Nescieme, the root of the amictions. This 
is the Cause. 
Motive or Fruit is that with a view to which appropriate virtue, I 
.&C., is brought about. There is no non-sequential manifestation. 
The Substratum is the mind which has yet a duty to perform. It 
is there that the resiclua live. They no longer care to live in a mind 
which has alrencly performed its duty ; tlleir substratum is goue. 
/ 
The Object (rilarnbana) of the residua is the substance which when 
placed in cor~tact cdls them forth. 
Tliqs are all the residua held together by Cause, Fruit, Substratum 
and Object. 

CH. IV. 
12. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENC8, 172. 
283 
When these exist not, the residua which depend upon them for 
existence, disappear too.-l 
7 l. 
VACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
p 
Now if thesc mental ~noHifications and the resiclua aro without beginni~lg, how - 
call they be destroyed? Tllc power of consciousness which is etornal is not destroyed. 
For this rcasou he says: -' I?eiog hold together by Cause, Fruit, Substratum and Object, 
I 
they disappear in the absence of these.' 
It is observed that t hhse that have no beginning are also destroyed. Take, for esample, 
the case of fubority. The p~wposition, therefore, fails and is no proof. The power of con- 
sciousness is not clostroyed, because there is cause which might cause its clcstruction, 
not because it has 110 boginning. And tllw aphorism too mentions the causes of the dos- 
truction of the residua ol though they arc without a hcgioniog. Kindness and injury too 
point to the causes of virtue and vice, &c. By this the use of spirituous liquors, &C., icl 
also undcrstood. 
He mentions the lrcason thereof :--' Tlw root of the afflictions, &C.' 
'1s brought about' means that it is proscnt. J t  does not mean that the substance 
virtue is produced. 
Mentioi~s ronson thereof :-' Therc is 110, &C.' 
With a, view to which ' means tohe substance which is in front, contact with the 
beloved, &c. The meaning of the aphorism is that, in the absence of the pervadcr the 
pervadcd is absent.4 l. 
X 
w 6 h  At& the past. mmi Aniigatam, the fnture. m: 
Svarfipatab, in reality. 
Pfin Asti, exiet. wzr htlhva, of the paths of being. % Blicdilt, there boiug 
difference. wihq ~ h h n l l i ~ ~ r i r n ,  
I 
of tho charw teristics. 
12. The past and the future exist in-reality, thpre 
being difference of the paths of being of the character- 
istics.-172. 

i 
VYASA. 
There is no existence for tbnt which exists not, and no destruction 
for what exists. How then can residua which exist as substances be 
destroyed ? ' The past and the present exist in reality, there being differ- 
ence of the paths of being of the characteristics.' 
The future is the manifestation which is to be. The past isathe 
appearance which has been experienced. 
The present is that which is 
in active operation. It is this three-fold suljstance which is the object 
of knowledge. If tliev 
a, did not exist in reality, there would not exist the 
kno~vleclge thereof. 
How could there be knowledge in the absence of 
anything that might be known. For this reason the past and the present 
exist in reality. 
Further, if the fruit of either the gctions which cause 
experience, or those which cause absolute freedom were impossible of 
being defined for the aspirer, the actions of the wise with that aim and 
object would not be proper. 
And the meqns has the power of only 
bringing into the present state the actrlally existing thokgh as yet un- 
manifested fruit, not of creating it anew. The means when in full mani- 
W 
festation specifically favours t,he sequential manifestation of its object ; it 
does not create it anew. 
Besides, the substratum exists as characterized by more character- 
istics than one ; and its characteristics have a distinct order of existence 
in consequence of the distinctions of the paths of being. 
It is not that the past, and the future states of the object exist in 
substance in the same sense in which the specific appearance of the pre- 
sent exists. How ther, ? The future exists as an appearance in itself to 
be manifested. The past exists by an appearance of its own which has 
been experienced. The present path of being alone is that which shows 
its own appearance a,s such. The same does not happen with reference 
to the past and the future paths of being. 
Of course at the time of one 
of these paths of being, the others remaiii 'conjoined with the sdmtratum. 
Iience the existence of the three paths of Geing does not come out of 
With the object of introducing the next aphorism the Commentator expresses a 
dol~bt :---' 
There is no existence for the non-existing, &C.' 
There is no oxisto~lce for the uon-existent :-This may either be taken as a liccessapy 
4 
sequence 'of the preceding, 'or, it map bo f aken as haviiig been introduced anew as an 
illustraf ion. 
- * S .  
. 
. 
X -  
' Tho past and t h e  future really exist, there being difference of the paths of being 
of the characteristics.' 
The non-existent is not born and the existent is not destroyed. The meaning of the 
aphorism is that the change of the path of being of the existing chatacteristics alone 

CB. W. 5 13. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 173. 
4 
means the rise and disappcnrance of the characteristics. The appearance which has 
beeh experienced, means the appcarancc which i t  has1 taken np already, or in other words, 
that of which there is no manifestation in the preseut. Thus the characteristic is exist- 
ent in all three tiliies. 
He says this :-' If they did not cxist in reali by, &a. 
The non-existent does not 
becotim the objcct of knowleclgs : i t  is therefore indcli~iable. 
Knowlcdgc is but the s1~ini11g out of its object in coilsoiousness. It caunot exist in 
the absence of the object. Wlictlicr it bc hhe Iiu~wleclge of the Yogi which has all the 
t.hree titlics for its spherc of opcrntioo, or the knowledge of lncn like ourselves, it can- 
not bo bor~i in tllc ;~bsence of the object. But the knowledge is born. Bor this reason, 
the knowieclge of him who f c ~ l s  
tltat tho p : ~ ~ t  
and tllc fatimc ordinarily exist along with 
the present, is said to be a rcasoll for the tvisienco of the obJect itsclf. 
Now hc says that oven 011 account of its being the aim (the objcc t of action) the yet 
unmaoifested oxis ts :-' Further, tlm Erni t of oi thnr tho aclion which causes exporionce, &G.' 
Tlie wise arc thosc who can distir~guish. Ancl oven in the case of what is t o  be 
do~lc, whatever inay bc the cnusc of wllatcver, bccol~ies spccializccl in case of the exist- 
ence of the ol~jcct alone. 
A s  is thc caso with tl~c farlucr and tho stndunt of the Veda, 
so is thc case hem. ' ~ l i e y  do not certaitily crcato non-osisting things. Similarly, the 
pottor, &C., arc the causes of the coming into present oxistcnco of the jar which already 
exists. He says this :- ' And the incalls has oilly the power of bringing Uie future into 
prcsellt esisteilce, SEC.' 
If, ~ O W C V O P ,  Lhe past and lllc fnturc do not exist because tlley do 
llot exist i n  the prcscilt, why then, t h ~  
prescnt also ~ O C S  not exist, I~ecause i t  does not 
exist in tlic? past nod the fnturc. Tllo cxistcncc of all the tlirec, howcvcr, is unqualified, 
on account of there boitig no spccializatioir of the substratu~n, and the paths of being. 
With this object he says :-' lksiclcs a substratum exists, &C.' 
Have a distinct order of existc~lce :-This 
lnearls that; each exists established in 
itself. 
In reality : meens the real objcct, tho substretnm. 
If the past and the future clid not exist as s i ~ c h  in the past and the future, they 
would not exist even ill the prcscilt, l~ccause thcn, they would be nobhillg ill rcality. For 
this reason lie says :-' Of course at tlro time of 0110 of these paths of being, &C.' 
Ho sumtnarizes the sitbjcct :-' IIonco tlio ezistcllce of the three paths of being, 
&C.'-12. 
Sfitra 13. - 
nature of the qualities.---l 73. 
paths of being, are of tile nature of the nmlifested, when they exist in 

286 
PATANJA LI'S YOGA. 
the present, and are of the nature of the subtle when they passed into the 
past or are yet nnmanifested. 
They are the six unspecialized appear- 
ances. All this is but the specific arrangement of the ' qualities.' 
In 
truth, therefore, they are of the nature of the ' clualities.' So teaches the 
Sastra :-'The 
real appearailce of the qualities does not come within the 
h e  of vision. 
That, however, which comes within the line, is but paltry 
delusion.'--173. 
V ~ C H A S P A T I * ~  
GLOSS. 
Let that be. This clet,ail, however, of the differences of thc world which puts forth 
the appea.rance of the changes of t h e  charsctcrizecl. the c harsctcristic, tbc secondary 
quality and condition in many ways, is ~ i o t  
capable of nppcarxncc from one Mfilaprakpiti. 
Poor this reason says :--They are manifested and subtle aild of the nature of the ' qunli- 
ties.' 
They, the charaotcristics possessed of the threo paths of bcing, are both manifested 
and subt-le, and tlrcy are of the nature of the qualities. There is no thing beyond tlm 
three qualities. The variety of ~osnifestation is due to thc variety which comes in se- 
quence of the eternal miseries and their resiclna which they have given birth to. 
I 
A s  has been said iu t h e  VIgu PurQm :-This 
change of tlie Pradhriua is wooderfu 
on acaount of showing forth all appcarsnoes. I t  is the six unspccialized manifestations, 
which in such a way as it may be, coilstitute thc past, the present and the future of the 
manifested Prithvi, &C., mid of the cleven instrurncnts of action, sensation and thought. 
Now describes the eternal appearance of the univer~o, with the ol~ject of divicl- 
ing the appearances tl~crenf into the eternal and the nou-etcrnal : All this is but the 
specific appearance of the ' qualities.' 
The meaniug is that evolutionary changes which 
are visible, consist of different arrangements and forms. On this subject is the teachi~g 
of the 69stra possessed of sixty Tantras. 
Is but paltry dellision ':-This 
m e m s  that it is paltry as if i t  were delusion, not 
that it is delusion and nothing olso. Paltry means destrnctible. As clelusion changes 
even in a day, so also the modifieations possessilg the characteristics of manifestation 
and disappearance assuruo other appearances every second. The Yrakpiti is possessed 
of the characteristic of eternitly, and in this way is different from the Mf~y6, it is so far 
real.-13. 
SCtt-a 14. 
&VW 
Parip Ama, of modification. 
Ekatvbt, on account of t h g  unity. 
Vastu, of the object. m, Tattvnm, the reality. 
14. The reality of the object on account of thc unity 
of nlotl ification.--174. 

4 
When all are qualities,' how is it that one m~dificat~ion is sound 
and the other the ~lense ? ' The reality of the object ..on account of unity 
of modification.' 
One modification of the qualities possessed of the nature 
of illumination, activity ancl inertia, and being of the nature of an instru- 
ment, appears in the shape of organs. This is the sense of hearing. 
4 
Another modification of the 
cpnlities ' appears in the objective state as 
the sonifemus ultimate atom 
(8abdn Tanmbtm). This is the. object 
~ound. 
The atom of Prithvi is ,z modification of sound, c
,
 existing along 
with the generic quality of form (rnGrti). It is n portion of tlio tsnmdtra. 
Single modifications of these atoms are the earth, the cow, the tree, the 
11 ill mid so forth. In the case of otlier elements nlso, taking np the 
generic y~~nlities 
of s m o o t h n ~ ,  temperature, impulsion and space, single 
~nodifications are to be uilderstood by medi taticn. 
There is no ol~ject not CO-existent with ideas. 
There are, however, 
ideas, which are not CO-existent with objects, such as those that are fancied 
in dreams. 
There are people who try to do away wit11 the realily of objects by 
this reasoning, saying that objects are but the fabrications of the mind, 
like the fancies of n dream, and that they are nothing real. The objeo 
tive morlcl is present by its own power. How is it that they give up the 
objective morlcl on the strength of imaginative cognition, and even then 
go on talking nonsense about it ? How is it possible to have Eai tll in them ? 
IVcll there may hc this sort of va'riety of modification of tho three qualities. Rut 
how is n. single modificntion hroi1gbL about in the shape of any one element, sag the Prit,hvi 
or t h e  Apns. 
Tllis unity is contlmdictcil by its nature. With this doubt the author intro- 
duces t,he nl~l~orism 
:--' Thc rcnlitj- of the object on account of t1be unity of modification.' - 
A single nlodificntion of morc than one is nlso ol~served. That as follnms :-The 
cow, the 
horse, the bnfTalo, the clepllnnt, all of them modify into a single suhstnnce, the snlt, when 
tBey are thrown into a m i m  o f  salt. Wick, oil and fire change into a lamp. In this wag, al- 
though the qualities are morc tlmn one, n singlc modification does t'akc place. For t h i s  rensoo, 
the Tanrnjtra, the elements and the objeet2s made of the elements Imve cnch n real unity. 
In the case of instmment n l  app~arances, h i n g  as they are t h e  effectn of thc principle 
of individuality, m d  ~ O S S C S S ~ C ~  
as they are of the nature of illumination on account of t h e  
preponderance of the qnnli ty of essentiality (Sattva), the modification is a single one in 

YOGA. 
Sound, tlm objcct :--#Sotoand llero moans tlw soeiferoos otlior (tmmBtra). The word 
objoc t' (vipyn) sigt~i 
fits noa-in tSclligo~lcc, 
boccaausc thc tan m l  bra callno t possibly hccolne 
the object of scnsrtion. Tlic rest is esng. 
Now brings in the Vii.j'csiks rvi L h  his idealistic tljeory :A' There is no object whioh 
is not CO-existent with an idea! 
. 
If the elements and pliysi~al objoebs l.w sonmetliing different from mere ideation, then 
it may be that such a Prokpiti bo put up as the cause of their production. 
They are not, 
kowevcr, different from ideas in r-xdity. How is it tl~cn that thc Pr~dhAna is put up as a 
cause ? How is it again that thu instrurnontnl appcaramcs arc hnciccl to exist as the 
modiRcstio~is of the principle of individ~mlity ? Thus scoi~lg that a non-intelligent objcot 
is not self-illcl~ni~icltive, it does not csist ~lnloss it CO-mist with the itlea. CO-existence 
means relation. The dcnial of co-osistonco r ~ ~ o s i ~ s  
its nbsenco. The mealling is that 
without coming into relationship with tho idea it is d no use ill practice. The idea, 
however, exists without bcing CO-cxietcllt with tho ot?jcct,.becnusc it is self-illuminative. 
It call exist as its own field of kilowlcdgo. It docs not stand in nced of n non-intelligent 
ol~joct in practice. These RiW t b  ~ * W O  
rules fhab are l~rought to noticc by idealistic philo- 
sopllurs ss going aloog with knowability. T h y  am ~ p p l i c d  thus :--That which is known 
by any act of knowledge, docs not tliffor Lhcwlrom, in the same may a5 knowledge does 
]lot cliffcr from the self. And tlm olc~ncnts and the physical phenomcns tlroreof are 
known by m act of knowldg~. This leads to a knowlcdgo of tlm porvnclcd which contra- 
dicts it. Knowability as it is sccn, is pcrvadcd by similarity, which contradicts the differ- 
ence to be donied, bringing hto colwciousncss t hc similarity which pervades ibsclf, it 
does anray with tho diffcrcnco which contradicts it. Thus :--That 
which is perceived 
with something else always invariably, dooa not differ from it. Just as one moon do- 
not differ from another moon. And an object ia invariably perceived together with the 
idea. This knowiodgc is Dcr<oivcd as being contradictory of the pcrvadcr. It contradicts 
tllo rule of the pcrvahr consixtilrg O£ the differcnco to bc elcnicd. This rule does away 
wit11 arbitrariuess, ancl- brings into conscb~nofi8 t h  diffcrcnce which consists in the 

Cll. IV. 
15. ON ABSOLlJTE INDEYENDEXCE, 175. 
289 
--p- 
I 
In some places the roading is ' Upagrihyate ' in place ot ' Utspijyate.' 
The meaning 
isthc same in either case. They ignoro the existence of the o ~ t s i d e  
worid, and yet go on 
1 
talking about it. How can tllorc be Pilitli in them ? The moaning here is thia. 
The 
causes which have been mentioned, i. e., invariable coincident perception and knowability, 
are not final, because application to t h e  canon of difference is doubtful. P'urthe~ ile 
externality and the grossness which arc pcrcuived to exist in the elements and the physb 
crl phenorncna thereof, which possess the forms of the ideas, are not possible of existence 
in the case of ideas themselves. Becadse externality means being related to separate 
space. Grossness means the pervading of more porticns of space than one. It is not 
possiblo that one idea may exist in more places than one, and also exist in a place separat- 
od from Itself. When a certain thing exists in a certain place, there cannot exist in the 
salno place, soulething else charaeterizcd by a quality opposite to the characteristic of 
being present i n  the same place. If i t  were possiblo the three worlds themselves would 
boome but one. 
I 
It may be said, let thcii there Le diflclence of ideas. Jf this be so, whence does 
this consciousness of grossness come in the case of notions, whose sphere of operations 
is very subtle, and which do not know of t 1142 cxiste~lcu and operation of each other, and 
which are only in relation to their own sphero of operation only. There shmld be no high 
talk about its being the sphere of imagitlation only because there is in that case no contact 
and because the reflectioll is very clear. Further thc gross has never been ma& 
the 
obj,joct of thought, so-that the idea clunlified thereby rimy be clearly perceived, nvon though 
a t  tile back of it tl~cro may exist imagimtivc cognition. Further imagination is 
con- 
filled to the kiiowledge of the thing itself as it exists in its own spherc, in tlm aamc way 
as knowledge freo from the taint of imagination is. Further a& imagination is not grow, 
it is not propcr that it sllotlld be acting in thc sphere of the gross. Therefore it is not 
possible that in thc cxterllal canse thcro should bc pcrccived grossness and externality, 
and hc11ce it should bo 'considered to be false. And the falsc is not inseparable from the 
idcl, bccausc if it wcro, the idcr itself would bocoma contemptible like thc false, on 
account of its not comprcllending cvcrythiog. Furthcr k~~owability 
being not pcrvrded 
by identity, how can it be the opposite of diffcreilco (bhoda). As to the rule of ~0,oinoi- 
dofico of perception of the idea and of grossness, it is capable of explanation like that 
of tho Sat and tho Asat (the esistent and thc non-existent) either by their nature 
or by obstructlion iron1 .some canso, oven though botli of 
them exist independently, 
Hen00 these two arguinents are not complete, and are therefore merely false simili- 
tudes of arguments, and they merely give rise to an imaginary conception of the 
non-e+istenco of the external. Further the power of perception cannot be dono away 
with by mere imagiimtion. It is therefore well said, ' How do they give up the objective 
world on the strength of imaginative cognitions ? ' 
By this also stands refuted tho assertion that notions mabr be generated without there 
being any actual basis for them, as in the C ~ S O  
of dreatn cognitious. 
The imaginative creation of the thing to be known, has been refuted by establishing 
the existence of the substratum, the whole as being indcpendcnt of the parts. Details 
will be found in the NyAya-Kanika. More details need not be entered into hem.-14. 
q Vastn, in the case of the external object. Blia S$mye, in the being the 
same. 
Ohitta, of mentality. m Rhedlt, there being difference. nh: Tayob, 
their. h: 
Vibhaktab, different. 
YanthQ, waye of being. 
87 

290 
PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
15. There being difference of mentzdity in the case 
i
r
 l 
And how otheirvise is it uutrue ? 
lllerc being difference .of 
account of right knowledge. NOW by whose mind has all that been 
imagined ? Further it is not proper that another mind be coloured by 
an objebt which llao been i111agirled by ailother. For this reason the lilies 
, 
of existence of the external objects and the ideas are different., as they 
least suspicion of confusion between them". . 
Further in the Sbhlrhya philosophy, a11 object is made of the three 
plloduced, each as such, ill accordance with the exci tiug causes. 
Some say that the object is co-existent with tlio idea, iuasuluch as 
it is to be eujoyed thereby like the feelings of pleasure and paifi. ' They 

CR. IV. 5 15. ON ABSOLUTE TNDEPENDENCE, 175. 
291 
do away by means of this conception, the common nature of the object 
with reference to minds, and this, hut do away with the being of the 
object in previous and snhfieq uen t moments. -1 75. 
V ACHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Having now mentioned the reasons for believing that the abject is different fmm and 
independent of t h e  ides, the Commentator now introduces another reason given in the 
aphor$tn to establish the same.:-And 
how otherwise is it untrue ? 
. 
' There being difference of mentality, even though the external object remains t h e  
same, tkeir paths of existence are different.' 
When a certain thing remaine the samo 
although the other changes into many states, they both differ from each other altogether. 
A s  the one idea of Chaitra differs from the different ideas of Devadatta, Visnumitra and 
Maitra, and although the ideas are different the object remains the same, tha object must 
be different from the idea. And the identity of the object even in the case of the difference 
of ideas, is ascertained by tlw knowers by cbmparison of notes. If one woman is belo~;ed, 
hated, ignored and approached with indifference by many different people, they can always 
compare notes that the object of all these varying feelings is the same. For this re-on, 
there being difference of mcntality, i. e. of feeling, the paths of being of the two, i. e., of the 
object and the idea, are different. The path of being means :that by which one tbing 
differs from allother in nature. The lover feels pleasure in the- society of the belovod. 
The CO-wile feels pain. Chaitra who has not been able to possess her, feels disappointed 
and forgets himself. 
Let it be so. But wheyever an object in the shape of a beautiful woman has been 
fancied by the mind of one man, the minds of others also admit of being coloured by the 
same fancied object, and it is for this reason that the object even though fancied, becomes . 
the common object of all the minds. 
For this reason says :-' It is not proper that the object fancied by one mind, be.' 
If, 
that were so, then in case one of them posscssed the knowledge of blue, all would come to 
possess the knowledge of the blue. 
The question arises that inasmuch as there is but one object in the opinion of those, 
who believe in the independent existence of objects, how is i t  that one object become8 
the cause of different feelings of pleasure and pain, &c. It is not proper that the aRaw 
remaining the same, the effects should be different. For this reason says :--' In the cam , 
of the S,ihthya philosophy, &C.' 
Even a single external object changing according to t h e  
tbreo qualities, admits of three-fold appearance. But in this way too, ell without distinc- 
tion would have the three-fold knowledge of pleasure, pain and forgetfulness with re- 
ference to the same object. For this reason says :-' Depends upon the operative causes 
of virtue, &C.' The Gattva together with the Rajas gives birth to the feeling of plwnm 
which depends upon virtue. The same Ssttva when free of the Rajas, creates the f&ing 
of indifference which depends upon knowledge. And these virtues, &C., do not exiat,alI of 
them, in all the Purusas everywhere. It is only any one of them that exist anywhere .f 
any time. 
Therefore tbe difference is proper. 
Some talkers say on this subject :-' The object certainly coexists with the 
because it is enjoyable by the Purusa like pleasure and pain. 
Tho meaning ie thia Let 
an object be different from the idea. Still it being non-intelligent, does not admit of 
being known without the idea. The idea it is that illuminates it. 8imilarly it exi& at 
tho time of beiqg known only. It cannot be said to be existing at any other time, b 
cause there is no authority for ita exietenw at a time when if Se oot the objwt of imme. 
diaf e know ledge. 

PATAA7JA T,T'S YOGA. 
This the Commentator refutes without the help of the aphorism :--g 
They by thi8, Mm, 
An object is ce~tninly common to all minds. It keeps on being cognized for a suocession of 
more moments thsn one as possessed of the characteristic of change. If that CO-exists 
with the idea, it will be thus, it is sach. Now what check is there upon the 
portion It, that this may not disappear too ?-15. 
1 Na, not. 
W Cha, and. 
Eka-chitta, on one mind. m, 
Tantram, do- 
pendent. $ Ched, if. v Vastu, an object. F Tat, by that. 
Pram&~a.kam, 
to be cognized by that. W Tada, then. h, 
Kim, what (only to denote the qnes- 
tion). v 
Syfvt, would it exist. 
1.6. And if an olxject dependent upon one mind 
were not cognized by 
V 
that, would it then ex.ist ?--176. 
If an object were dependent upon the mind, then in case the mind 
.toere restrained, or atte~lding to some other object, the object would not 
be touched thereby, nor woyl tl it come in to objective ~*elat,ionsllip 
l with 
any other mind. It would not bc cognized, &. e., its nature would not he 
taken in, by any miud. 
Will it cease to exist at the time ? Or, coming 
into relationship again with the mind, whence would it come back to 
life ? 
t 
Further the parts of an object which are not in contact with the 
mind, would not exist. Thus there mould be no back, ard how could 
tllen there be'the front itlselE ? For this reason, the object is self-dependent, 1 
and common to ail the Purugas. 
Minds also are self-dependent. They # t: 
colne illto relationship ni th the Purusas. Bv 
a# their re1 ationship is secured 
perception, which is enjoyment (bhoga).-176. 
VACHA~PATI~S 
GLOSS. 
Or, there may not be this disappearance of a portion ; lot the object be CO-existent 
with the ides. On this also Rap :-'And 
if an object dependent upon onc mind were not 1 
C 
cognized by that, would it then exist ? If the mind which cognizes a jar, does not at ally . 
time turh towards it on account of attention being directed towards a cloth, or if an object 
having been the object of discrimination the mind thereby becomes restrained, then the 'I 
idea of the jar and the knowledge of discrimination would not be in exiefewe a* t.he time. 

. 
IV. 6 
e 17. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 177. 
203 
and the jar'aud the knowledge being dependent for their existence upon the csexisfence 
of the idea thereof in the mind, would no doubt cease to exist. Says this :---' 
One mind, &.' 
' Woulcl it then exist ? ?-Means 
it would not esist. 
Bnrthcr coming into relationship with t h e  mind, how wonld the jar or tho discrimins- 
tion be borll again. Effects have constanb causes and lead to them invariably by both the 
canons of agreement and difference. Effects cannot be born from causes other than their 
o w  appropriate causes. In the absence of the cause there would be no occasion for their 
existeilcc. For, is it proper that an object being the cause of the knowledge thereof, it 
should :dso bc thc cause of itself ? If thils were so, then the sweets which one might be 
expccti~g to get, and the sweets wbich ono might be really using, would be equally 
placcd with reference to taste, strength and digeation. It has therefore been well 
said : --' If it come into relationship with the mind, &C.' 
Further the front portion of any object is always pervaded by the middle and poste- 
rior parts, i. c., it cannot exist without the simultaneous existence, of the middle and 
l 
posterior parts. If the existence of an object depended upon being perceived, then 
thc micldlo and posterior parts wonld not exist, and thus on account of the ccssntion 
of ~ervasion tIm front part also would ccrse to exist. The object itself would not thus 
bc? in esistcuce, how then would it he in existence along with the idea itself ? 88ys 
this : - b  
T l ~ o  
portions thcreof which are in contact, &C.' 
::ot in contact means not known. 
k 
Coocl udes :-' For this reason, &C.' 
The rest is easy .--l& 
l 
-- 
S ~ t r a  17. 
q Tad, thereby. M Uparliga, colouring. m 
~ ~ e k g i t v b t ,  
because of 
the needing. k m  Chittasya, for the mind, by the mind. 
Vastu, an object. 
*.r A 
WRI Jfihta, known. m? 
A jnatam, or t~nknown. 
17. The mind needing to be coloured thereby an 
object may be known or unknown.-177. 
edrs;p: @&sqm: 
I e
r
 
mmmaaampftmrfk huq 11 p* 1 
' 'l'he miud s t a ~ d i  
ng in need of bei i ~ g  coloured thereby, an object 
may be known ory unknown.' 
Objects are in nature similar to that of 
londsto~le ; the mind is similar in characteristic to iron. 
Objects coming 
into c m  tact with the mind colour it. 
Whatever object coiours the mind, 
that object becomes known. 
That which becomes known is an object. 
That which is not thus known is the Purutn m d  is unknown. The 
mind is changeful, because it assumes the natures of known and unknown 
objec ts..--77. 
VACEIILBPATI~S 
GLOSS. 
Lct that be. If the object were self-dependent and aIso anintelligent, it would never 
be illuminated. It! now it were to becomo illnminated, its non-intelligence too mould 
disappear. No oxistcnce can mmain as such when it gives up it* nrtnm. Nor is it proper 

PATANJA LI'S YOGA. 
/ 
that Blie nature of an unintelligent objec t should receive the illumination of its character- 
ietic by beitlg the receptacle ot the action ot the senses. Because if it became the chn- 
~ t e r i s t i c  
ot the object then it would, like the qualities ot bltiermss, &C., be t h e  
common attribute of all the Purusas. This boing so, if one mm became lear~ied , all 
would become learned. No one would remain ignorant. Nor is it proper that the present 
should be characteristic of the past and tile ye& unmanifosted. Hence to say that 
an object is self-dependent and (.hat it is the sphere for the act of perception ia but a 
wish of t h e  mind For this reason nays :- 
0' Tho mitlil needing to be coloured by contact 
therewith, m object rnly be known or uuknown.' 
Even though an object is by nature 
non-intelligent, it colours the mind by coming into contact therewith through the passage 
of the senses, becawe such is the mirror of the mind, the power of conscioannc.sa being 
wtlocted into it, enlivens the rnitid with t h e  colour of the object therein, an4 thus k n o w  
it. It does not however produce any sort of clearness, &C., 
in the object. Nor is it that 
tLo power of consciousnc~s is unrelated to the mind, becawe it. has been said that its 
reflection passes into it. Altho~igh tbo mind being nll-pervading, and th'e senses being 
of the nature of the principle of individuality, cannot come into relationship with the 
object, atill the relationship of the object is with the mind which fuoctioes in t h e  body. 
It is for this reavoll that they have been said to be of the nature of tho loadshone, and 
that the mind possesses a characteristic similar to iron and that thoy coloar it by hrvi!lg 
como into contact with it through the passagt) of the senses. Says that it is for t h i s  ru r- 
son that the mind is changeful : ' On acconut of the object being known, &c.'-47. 
Sad&, dwsye. m: Jli&tBh, are known. Rmm: Chitta-vyittayrb, the 
modifications of the mind. F&: Tat-prrrbhob, to its lord. ,W Puruaasya, tile 
Purup. 
A pari~lrnlt, on account .of the unchaugeabili by. 
18. To ik lord, the Puruga, the modifications 
of the m i l d  are always known on-account-of-unchmge- 
'1'0 its lord.;, the Puru~a, whose sphere of functioning the mind 
itself is, mentd modifications are ever known, because 110 is uhchangeable. 
It the lord, Puroga, too changes like the mind, the mental mcxlificatione 
too in which it tanctions r~ould be both known and unknown, like the 
objects of sound, &c. 
The mind however is always known to its lord the 
Puruga. 
By this is inferred its unchangesbili ty .-l 78. 
, Having thus establiehed the mind and the object to be separate frgm each other, the 
autihor now re* 
the aphorism, Blling up the ~rqieeione, with tho objeo t of showing that 

CH. IV. 
19. ON ABSOLUTE Ih7DEPENDENCE, 179. 
the solf is difforcnt from those changeful objects and that the chnracteristic of tho PuruY 
is ull~hangeability, ~ l l i c h  is tllc opposite of the charactcristicpf the objects and the mind. 
' TO the lord, Parop, whoso sphere of functioning tho mind itself is, BC.' The moaifica- 
a 
tioirs of tho mind aro always known to the Puruy, because he is unchangeablo. The 
mind with its ~aodificrtions is always Pollowecl by the Purusa in all its lnodiflcation~ of 
thc wandering, the clistrnctcd, the one-pointed, up to the state of inhibition. By whibt 
rcaeon thrn is the l'iirup, u~lchangeable ? ' If tho Pnrup were -unchangeable, i t  wodd 
both bo k ~ ~ o w n  
ancl u ~ h l o w n  like the mind (chitta). It is however always knoan. 
It is thcrcforc n ~ ~ c l l ~ ~ ~ g c a b l r ~  
ancl for this reason differs from other changrable objects. 
Says this :-'If 
tlrc lord L3uruqe changed, &cm' ~ h b  
lord who is the enjoyor of tho mind 
Ir~m~s 
i t  constantly :hug with its modifications. 
This fact cstablisbcs by inference 
the u n c l ~ ~ ~ ~ g c z b i  
li ty of thc? Purugr. Thus tile meaning is that this unchangeablo I'eruga 
is d i k r c n  t from thc clinuging mind.-18. 
A ilo~lbt niay arise that tlie i n i t d  itself may be self-illuminating as 
v . 
well as the illwuitmtor' o f  tlm objects, as i n  faet it is believed by the Pal- 
1ibJiltus to Le like lire, w l d l  illulninntes itsel E as well as other objects. 
r l 
1.1lsrefore says :- ' It is 11ot self-illulllillatirlg being tl~elrnowable.' As tlle 
otlrer otegans and the ol~ject of sourd, &C., are not self-illurninat,ive on 
accouut of their beillg lwowabk, so also sl~ould the i n i d  be untlerstood to 
bc. 
]('ire is m analogy Ilcre. 
I'ire does not ill unhate any form of itself 
wlkli lnigllt luve been ilou-lulniuous befoi*e.' The illuminatioil spoken of 
hel-e is nleaut to be the illun~ination whicl~ is brought &out by the contact 
of the lumiuous an3 the dat-k, not of the self-luminous. There can be no 
contact of ai~ytlling with its own nature. 
Further, the stnteinent that 
the 
ruind is self-illun~inntir~g 
ineai~s that it is not perceivable by any 
other entity. 'l'his is i t 1  the same way a s  when it is said that the Akiids 
is self-supporting, it is meaut, that i t  has 110 support at all. Living beings 

are seen acti~ig in accortlmce \v i tll the consciousness of the ~novenleilts 
b 
Y 
4 
, 
9 
of their W ill-to-lw. 
[ a111 I
*
 
I ;ltn : ~ f t * i t ~  
1 ,  
' I at 11 i ~ t  
tnchetl liere, 
6 T sol repelled t e e  these tlot ioos .are proper only on i~ccou 
11 t of tlle 
knowledge of sclf-identification not being taken in.- 17:). 
V~CHASPATI'S G LOSS. 
Mentions the VainPR'ikas : - ' A  doubt may arise, &C.' This is the meaning. It may 
be so it the mind be the spilere for the f~nct~ioning 
of t h e  Sclf. The miud lroi~c\~er 
ie 
self-illnmi~~ativo 
and it illn~i'h~ates 
other objects also as it illuminates itsclf. How then 
can it be the sphere for the constant knowledge of t h e  P u r u ~ a  
? How mr>rcovcr docs it in 
i t  S mchangcabilitIy differ from the changeable mind. Therefore, ' It is not self-illurnina- 
ting, being koo\rable.' It might be so if the mind were self-illu~ni~rrrting, 
(self-knowing), 
bat it is not. Being changeable, the mind is pervaded by perceptibility, lilrc tho colours 
of blue, &c. Whatever is pervaded by perceptibility, is not c a p a l h  of becoming self- 
illuminative, because tho rnoclilication contradicts itself. The act and the object cannot 
t 
,k 
both bn the same. The cooking is not cooked: the cutting is not cat. The Puruy, 
however, being unchaugeable as he is, is not t h e  object of the act of cousclousncss. In him 
therefore self-illumiatio is not irn y roper. His illurninat ivcncss docs not depend upon 
:LIIJ otlier, he is self-illuminative and is nob the objcct of the act of consciousness. Huucc 
the mind is the object ot the aut of knowing on account of its being the knowable ; it is 
not self-illuminative. The meaning is that because the mind is seiacd of the rcflcction 
of tlre self the object of its modifications are illuminated. 
But the fire is both tlm knowablo and the sclf-illumiiious as a jar, &C., arc brought 
to light by fire not so fire is brought to light by allother fire. For this reason says :-- 
E'iro is no analogy h e r ~ .  Why not ? ' Tlm fire does not illuminate, &C.' 
The mcttning 
is that fire may not bc brought talight by other fire, bnt it is ill~~minnted 
by consoioos- 
ness. I t  is t h u s  not illutninatcd by itsclf, and for this rcnson thcro is no ovcr-lapping 
(Vyabhichgra). ' The illurniilntion spoken of hem, &C.' 
Tho words ' spokcn of hcrc ' 
diffcrentiato from thc illurninstion which ie of the nati~ro of the Parosrt, the illnmination, 
tll& is to say, which is of the for:li of tllo nctiol~. This is intended to hc said : What- 
aver action there may be, i t  is seen in relation to thc subject, tile instrument iiild tllc 
object. A s  cooking is seen in relation to Chaitra, fire nud rice, so also illomination. Illu- 
nlination also is action. This also ~uust therefore 1.m like that, Relation lives in different 
objects ; it is not possible in the absoncc of d i s h c t i o ~ r .  Pnrthcr the assertion that the 
mind is self-illuminating, means that the mind is not perceivable by m y  othcr entity. 
Let that be. Let the mind be not perc6ivablc by a y  otllcr entity. The mind would 
not cease to 11e if the act of knowing, which is neither its cause, nor its pcrvado, ceased 
to be. For this reason hc says : ' By thc'c~nsciousness of the movements of his owl1 Will- 
to be.' 
The Wjll-to-be is ths mind. Its movcmeots are its Eunctiooiu,~~. Living beings 
are creatures. The various ~nental n;odifications of anger, greed, &C., arc felt by each 
mind for itself, together with their su?~stratum tllc u~illd, ancl also together with their 
objects. They in this way establish the objectivity of the mind. Ronders the c6nscious- 
ness of the movements of the Will to-be 111niner :--' I am angry, &c.'-19. 
Stitra 20, 
Eka-samaye, at the same time. 8 Cha, and. W Ubhaye, of both. 
* 1  .*. . 
a .  . 
. 
Anavadhbrapaln p impossl t x ~ t y  
ot hein l
.
 
q cognised. 
i

H
.
 IV. 
2 1  ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 181. 
207 
20. 
Nor can both be cognized at the same time.-( 
V Y ~ S A .  
And it is not proper tlhat in oile moment both one's own nature and 
the nature of other objects inay be ascertained. The conception of the 
advocates of mo~rlentary existence however is that acting is the same as 
being 
L ; and the sul)je~t~, 
object, imtiwncnt, &C., are the same too.--180. 
'And both cannot be cognized at the same time.' To him who says that tho mind 
is both self-illu~ninating and the illuminator of objects, it cannot of conrse be possiblo 
that the object may be understood at the same time as the self of the mind, and by the 
the salno act. An act which is not cliffercnt from any other is not competent to bring 
about an effect which is not different. Therefore a dilFeroncc of function must be recog- 
nized. And to the Vainiidikas there is no separation of operation for clifference of 
cffocts. And it is not possible that there should bc a differenec of effects brought about 
by a single birth which is common to all and does not differ from itself:- For this reason 
tho knowledge of the object and the act of knowledge cannot be ascertained in ono 
moment of time. This is what the Commentary renders clear :-' And in one moment of 
time, &C.' 
And so the Vainhriikae say :-Whatever js the being of a thing the same is 
their action and the same the subject object. ' Instrument, &C.' 
Hence the knowability of 
the mind is for ever; and this removes the idea of its being self-illuminating. This also 
shows that the seer is unchangeable. Thus all is proved.--20. 
1 
c1 ~ittbntara- 
driiye, in case of being knowable by another mind. 
z@-E$: 
Rnddhi-Buddheb, of the bills to know, the wills to know. dkq: Atipra- 
U 
U 
safigah, too many, abundance, superfluity. qfi-W: 
Smriti-Sahkarab, confusion of 
memories. e Cha, and. 
21. In case of being knowable by another mind, 
there will be too many wills-to-know the Wills-to-know ; and 
there will be confusion of memories.-181. 

298 
PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
There may be an opinion that'the mind restrained in its own being 
may be known by another mind just in contact with it. ' In case of being 
known by another mind tllere mill be too many wills-tohow the IVills- 
to-Itnow ; and there will be confusion of memories.' If the mind be 
cognized by another mind, by what may the wills-to-ltnom the Wills- 
to-know be cognized. 
Even that bv 
U another ; and that again by ano- 
ther. There will thus be too inany of such Wills-to-know. 
And there 
will be confusion of memories. 
A s  many mill be the cognitions of the vari- 
- 
ous Wills-to-be, so many will be the memories. 
One memory mill not he '. 
capable of determination on account of their con'fusion. Thus the Vaiuii- 
dikas have confused everything by denying the existence of the I'urosa 
who knows by reflex action the Will-to-lwocv. 
Further, they are 
not logical in imagining as they do, tllm existence of the Purusa in 
some places. 
Some tliere are who say that there does exist a pure 
being, and that that being throws away the existing five Skandhns and 
takes up others. Having asserted so much they fight shy again of t h e  
88m04 
Further they say that for the purpose of entirely doing away with 
the Skandhas, and for securing clesirelessness, non-production 
- 
nncl calln- 
ness, thev 
U mould go to a teacher a d  with him live the life of a student. 
And having said this they begirl again to conceal the very existence.. of 
that being. 
As to the Sailkhyeyoga theories, thev 
C declare by the word SVA (on 
one's own) applied to the mind that there does exist the lord in the shape 
of the enjoyer of the mind.-181. 
~BCHASPATI'S 
GLOSS. 
Introduces the Vainis'ikas again :--There may be a theory that although the mind 
may not know itself by its own life, on account of its being objective by nature,yet 
even that fact does not prove the existence of the self-restrained moment of the mind 
which generates the next may well be taken in by the last u:ental moment of its own 
succession. This is the meaning. ' Another mind just in contact therewith. This othcr 
mind is equal in knowledge, and between the two there is nothing else intervening.' 
Therefore, ' In case of being knowable by mother mind, &C.' 
The Will-to-be stands hero 
for the mind. If the last act of mentality is not itscli perceived, it cannot havo the 
power of perceiving the previous sc.6 of mentality. It is not proper that the previous 
Will-to-know should be known without coming into contact with the present Will-@-know 
itself. No ono who does llot take hold of the connecting rod can reach t h e  holder of the 
od himself. Hence there is o wgru sslr S ad ilafi~,i 
t j i  nt. 

CB. IV. 
22. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 182. 
299 
The Skanclhas are Bvo :-Vijj fibna, Vedanfi, Sapj G&, RQpa and SamskBra. 
' The theories of the SAiikhya yoga, &C.' 
This means the theories of the SSrikhyae 
and the Yogas and of tllo Vaikesikas, &C., which are preceded by t h e  Shikhyas and the 
Yogas. The rest is easy.-21. 
M: Chi tteb, of the consciousness. W%-: 
Apratisaqkram&y&, of such 
as is notable to transform from place to place. q Tad, its. - 
Bk~rapttau, 
by transforlning appearance. 
&Q-Q*~, 
'a 
Sva-Buddhi Sa~vedanam, knowing of. 
i%qq, its own. W, will to be. 26. 
22. 
Consciousness knows its own Will-to-be by 
transforming its appearance, tIhough not-itself moving-from 
VYASA. 
How ? ' Clonsciousiless knows its own Will-to-be by transforming 
its own appearance, though not itself moving from place to place. 
The power of enjoyment is of *course unchanging. It does not also go 
from place to place. In the changing sbject it looks as though transferred 
thereto ; and there it follows its manifestations. And it imitates, as it 
were, the modifications of the Will-to-be whose form is now enlivened by 
the consciousi~ess wllich has entered therein. 
By that imitation it is 
called a manifestation or modification of cansciousness, without being 
actually qualified by the modifications of the Will-to-be. This means that 
it does llot at all appear to be clifferent from the modificatio~~s 
thereof. 
And so it has been said :- 
Nor nether worlds, nor mountain caves, nor darkness, nor seas, nor 
ravines a,-e the hollows in which is placed the Eternal Brahma. 
The 
wise points out to the modification of the Will-to-be which does not look 
* 
diflerent from him.--182. 
V ~ ~ C H A Y P A T I * ~  
GLOSS. 
Let tliat be. If liowevcr the mind is'not fhlf-illuminative nor knowable by another 
mind, how should it be cnjogcd by the Self himself? For although the Self is no doubt 
sol£-illuminating, it does not put forth any action anywhere. Wit4hout putting forth any 

acction ho cannot be the actor. Nor can ho bo the cnjoyer of 
the mind without 
coming into rcl.ationship wikh the millcl through action. Tlint would be going beyond the 
ordinary rule. 
With this in mind puts the yuestioi~ :-' How 1' 
Gives t,ho answer by the ,zphorism :-' Consciousricss knows its own Will-to-h 
by transformiug into its own shape, although not i tsclf' moving from place to place.' 
b 
What was said bcforo, ' Icltntificaticlrr With mocliflcations clsewhere' (P. I. 4) has 
its origin here. The knowing by tho P u r u p  of his !Till-to-bc is acl~iovcd whcil tlia 
Will-to-be tekcs thc form of the I'urusa, 
ix., w11c11 it tnkcs on the appearallcc thcrcof 
by receiving into itself the reflection of tlie P u r u p .  Sinlilarly is thc case with the moon, 
when reflected in pure water. Altl~ough t h e  moon is not in o~otio~l, 
jet slie appears to bo 
ia motion on accouut of the movemci~ts of t h e  water, without any action of her ow11. I11 
the same way without any sort of action on the part of consciousness, the mind in which 
the reflection of consciousness has hkcn its place, shows the power of consciousness to 
be active by its own movements, and makes it appcsr to be following itself, although in 
reality it does not follow it. It is by acting in this way that tllc n h d  brings about tho 
experiesee of the Purusa and gives him the nature of the cnjoycr. This is the meaning 
of the aphorism. Tho commentary does not oxplain the meaning herc, because it hae 
cxplaiiied the same ill iilany places already here and there. The Commentary here dcs- 
cribes thqmeaning of the inoclificstions of oonscio~~sncss 
as ,lot b e i q  ilidepcndent of the 
9 r t  
modifications of the Will-to-be. As has been said :--' Neither t11o nether worlds, &c. I hey , 
say that the mental rr~odification in which the rcflection of consciousiicss has made its 
plaeo is on account of that very reflection, the care of Brahma, who is pure in catnre, 
eternal and auspicious. It is in that cave alone that thc Bidden Brallma is to bo foimd. 
When that is removed, he shines by his own light, there being no obstruetion and no 
de fect. This is the case with the revercd one who has reached his last body. -22. 
Draptri-Urid ydJperali tarn, being coloured by. -9, 
the knower 
(R), and the knowable. gm, b, Chittan, the mind. W&, 
Sarvbrthsm, omni- 
objective. 
23. The mind being coloured by the knower and 
the knowable is omni-objective (sarv&rtha).- 183. 

CH. W. 23. ON AB30LlJTE INDEPENDENCE, 183. 
301 
I 
vlyisa. 
~\nd it is lino\~n in this way :-' The mind being coloured by the 
Itnower and the known, is ornni-objective.' The mind- is of courm 
coloured by the objects of thought. Tbe mind being itself an object 
comes into relationsllip with the subjective Puruva through its modi- 
fication a s  Self.' 'I'llus it is that the mind is coloured by both subjectivity 
and objectivity, the lmower and the knowable ; it assumes the nature of 
Lot11 the const:ious and uuconscions. - 4ltbough it ia of the very nature 
of the objective, it appears as if it were of the nature of the subjective. 
Al tlmigh it is devoid of consciousness by its nature,? it appears as if it 
were ecosciousness. Being of the nature of the crystal, it is termed omni- 
objective. 
It is by this sindaiity of mental appearance that some peopl are 
cleceivecl into e a ~ i n g  
v 
t h t  the mind itself is the conscious agent. There 
arc others again ~ v l m  say that all this is but tlle mind only and that 
tllcive is nothing in existeuce of the objective worlcl, such as the cow or jar, 
all of which are governed by the l w  of cinmstion. 
They are to be pitied. 
For what reason ? Because they are possessed of a mind which is the cause 
of confusion, shining forth as it does in the shape oE all appearances. 
In tl~e case of the trancp. cognition, the cognizable object is reflected 
into the m i ~ d ,  
and it is different from tllo trance cognition, because ii, is 
the &ject upon whicl? the act of cognition rests. If that object were the 
inincl alone, how could it be &.hat the plre~~o~nenon 
of cognition would be 
taken in by the cognition itself. For tlLs reason, he who takes in the 
object reflected in the mii10, is the Puru~a. Tlius those who teach that 
I 
( 
the knwver, the kuowable arrd the means of lrrlowledge are the. three 
modifi'cations of the mind, and thus divide the phenomena into three 
classes are the only true philosopllers. It is to then1 that the Ptmqa is 
Thus has been e~t~ablished 
the existence of the Purup, the unchangeable as a separate 
entity from the mind which is by nature changeable, being as it is by nature the know- 
able. Now he gives also the authority of the perceptions of the world to prove the same, 
And it is knowu in this way.' 
The n~eaning is that it must be so. ' The mind coloured 
by both the knower and the knowable is omni-objective.' 
As the mind coloured by the 
blue slid other objects establishes thcir existence by perception itself, so also coloured 
by the reflection of the knower into itself, the mind establishes the existence ot the 
knower too by porceptio~r. A not4ion is evidently made up of two percepts ' I know the 
blue object.' 
Therefore tire subject also is of a nntnrc similar to that of the object, AI- 
though proved by perception, it is ndt  show^ thereby as existir~g separately from the 
mind, like the reflection of the moon which in perceived to he quite distinct from the 
water illto which it is reflected. The mental peweption of the Self doee not bmso to be 
perception merely y this much. 
P 

PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
Further inasmuch as the reflection in the water does not osist in reality as a moon 
it cannot be said that because thc? rcflection is only a reflection and not the substance 
itself, that therefore the moon hersoif does not exist. In the same way, althougl~ con- 
sciousness becomes the objective in its state of mental reflection, i t  clocs not so become 
in its own nature. This is what is meant by the milld being omni-objective. Says this :- 
' The mind coloored by the object of thought, &C.' It is not by thc external object alone 
that the mind is coloured by assuming its shape ; it is coloured by thc Porup too. The 
reflection of the P u r u ~ a  is his, the Self's manifestation (vritti). This rcflcction of the 
P a r u p  is to be accepted by the VainBGikas a.1~0. How? I£ this be not so they m u ~ t  
fasten the consciousncss upon tlio mind, sayingthat there is consciousness in the mind. 
Says so :--' Misled by this similarity of the mind, &C.' There are some Vain bdikas who 
Weak of the existence of an eternal object. ' There are others who speak of the exist- 
ence of an idea. The questioil now is that, if the mind shines forth both as a subject and 
an object, there must certainly bc a difference betw&en the knower and the knowable. 
As they say :-Although 
t h e  Sclf of the Will-to-be is not different, yet those who arc 
given toseeing things separated from each other, see it as possessed of the differences 
of the concepts of the subjective and the objective. This being the case, how are tllcy 
to be 13itied ? Says for this reason :-' In the case of the trance cognition, &C.' Tllcy 
must be bronght round by first convincing them by thc nbovo reasoning that the P u r l l p  
must he something different from the mind, and then bringing t l x m  into touch with 
the trance copitioo, which has the self as tllc sphere of its opera l 
ion by teacltillg tllclu 
the eight branchcs of Yoga. That is to bc done ill this way. In the trsncc cognitliol~ 6110 
objcct of knowledge is the Sclf rcflcclcd into bhc mild. It is di;t'crcnt from tllc real Self. 
because it becomes the szpport to that, Self (Atmd). 
If hc begin to say notwitllstandillg 
that he is given the reasons, that the support may 
the mind itself, it is said :-If the 
object which appears as the Sclf, be the mind itself and nothing different from ib, then 
how is it possible that the mind may be known by the mind itself (the act of knowing 
that is to say, by the act oE knowing itself). It is self-contradictory to slmak of the 
action of a mental modification upou itself. Concludes :--' Therefore, &C.' 
They are to 
pitied and taught the truth. Says this :-'In this way, &C.' 
Class rucsns nature. 
q Tad, that. ati~-m*:. Asabkheya-VAsanRl~1ii1~, 
(variegated) by innumer- 
able. ( W q )  residun (m%:). 
Rgy Chit tarn, mind. a^m Api, also. mli.3, ParBrtha~n, 
exists for another. ties-wfiiy Saqhatya-KBri 
. tvbt, because it acts hy combination. 
I 
24. 
And the mind exists-for-another, also because 
it is variegated by innumerable residua, inasinuch as it 
acts by colnbination.-184. 

C
.
 IV. S 24. 
ON ABSOLUTE INI>.EPENDENCB, 184. 
303 
C 
And f w  wlmt other reason is this the case? ' And it exists for another, 
. *. 
also brcnnse it is variegated by inrlunlernble residua, inasinuch as it acts by 
colnbinatio~ 
? 
This mind is variegated by iunumerable residua. 
It must 
therefore exist for another, i.e.. for achieving the enjoyment and emnnci- 
pation of another, not for the achievement of its own object. Recanso 
it acts by combination. As a house which 1x1s assumed its slmpe as such, 
by n r i o n s  materials being brougl: t togetl~er,--cannot 
come into existence 
for itself, so also the mind which assumes a particular shape by more 
things than one coming together. The mental phenomenon of pleasure 
does not exist for its own d i e  ; nor does knowledge exist for iteelf. 
On the contrary both these exist for tlle sake of another. That other is 
the Pnrusa who has objects to achieve in the sllnpe of enjoyment and 
etnniicipa tion. It cannot be nnot1her of the same class. 
Whatever else 
the Vai~i~ziilta 
speaks of bevond 
V 
this as being of the same class, all that 
must be of the same. class, acting as that also would do by combination. 
The other llowever is peculiar to itself and differs from the others in not 
nc ti ng hy cornbination. 
That is the Puruga.--184. 
V~CHASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Introduces another reason for believing that tho mind is different from the Self :- 
And for what other reason? ' And i t  exists for another, also because it is variegated . 
by innumdrnhlo residua, inasmuch- as it acts by combination.' 
Tho meaning of the 
aphorism is this. Altliough innnmerablc resicloa of action and onlication live in the mind 
and not in the Purosa, and although farther, the fruitions depending upon thc residua 
also live in the mind ancl this fact seems to establish the contention that t h e  mincl itself 
is both the enjoyer and the object, of enjoyment existing for the enjoycr, and that every- 
thing therefore exists for the mind, still that mind, notwithstanding its being variegated 
by innumerable residua exists for another. 
Why ? Becanso it acts by combination. 
L This 
is the meaning of the aphorism. Explains :-' The mincl, &C.' 
Some one may say that although i t  may be granted that the mind acts by combination, 
yet notwithstanding this, why should it not 110 conceived as oxisting and acting for the 
snkc of itself? Where is the contradiction in this theory ? Says to him :-L 
I3ccausc i t  
nc ts by combination.' 
The mental phenomenon of pleasure.' These words indicate the expericnoe side 
of ilaturo and the painfa1 mind is also , understood thercby. The knowledge indicates 
tlm crnancipatiori side. This is the meaning. Tllo pleasurable and painfdl minds con- 
sisting as they do of similar and oppositc irn grcssions are not 11ossible of the Self, because 
the u~aoifest,ntions ill that case would contratlict thcmsclves. Nor can anything else 
acting 1)y cdtrrbinntion eithcr directly or i~rdircctly and thus causing pleasure or pain, bo 
cil hcr favoured or clisfavourcc1 by 'tIlcrn. Tllcrcfore hc alonc who does not operate as pleasure 
ntrd pain clircctly or i ~ ~ l i r c c t l y  
c211 e i t h c ~  
be favoured or disfav~ured by them. This can- 
o d y  11c the P~wnqn who is always ii~iliEcrent and who can thus be crnancipatcd. His 
knomlcdgo too being clcpcnclcnt upon the object of knowleclgc, and being thus oontradic- 
t o ~ y  
in its own rn~~~ifcstation, 
it cannot bo said that the knowledge is its owtd object. 
For this reason emancipation from external objects becomes impossible, in the same way 

304 
PAl1ANJALI'S YOGA. 
as emancipation is not possible in the case of the Videhas and the Prak pi tilayas. There- 
fore knowledge also exists for the sake of the Pnrup, not for the sake of the mind itself. 
Nor is the mind in existence for the sake of a~mther of the Game kind, because that 
would mean infinite regression. He therefore for whose sake the mind exists must be the 
Puruss Who does not act by con junction.--24. 
Viieyadardinab (
)
 
for the seer 
of the distinction (m). arn 
Atma, of the self. m Rh&va, of the nature and relation of. m Bhbvan&, of the 
curiositye 5f%qf?+: Vinivrittih, the cessation. 
%+id%: ceases the cnriosity 
ne to the nature and relation8 of the Self. 
/ 
25. For the seer of the distinction, 
ceases the 
curiosity as to the nature-and-relations of the Self .- 185. 
4 s  the existence of seeds is inferred from blades of grass shooting 
fol*tl~ 
in the rainy season, so it i~ inferred that he whose tears flow and 
whose hair stand on end when he hears of the path of liberation, has a 
store of I'arma tending to liberation as the seed of the recognition of the 
distinction (between the Purusa and the Sattva). The curiosity as to the 
nature for the eelf is naturally manifested in him. In the absence there- 
of, however, he gives up the nature thus described; and by the defect he 
- 
-I 
loves the anti thesie and dislikes the thesis. 
Here the curiosity as Ethe nature of the Self appears as- 
9 
1 
9 
g 
' \\rho was I ? 
HOW was Ij: 
What is this ?' ------ 
' IIow is this?' 
' WImt shall we become ?' ' How shall we become ? This how- 
C 
ever ceases in the case of him who sees the tlistinction (between the Purn- 
sn and the mind). Why ? This varied clmrlge is of the mind alone. 
The curiosity however in the absence of Nescience is pure, that is, not 
tonclled by the characteristics of the mind. For this reason too tho 
cllriosity as to the nature and relations of Self ceqws for the wise,-- 185. 
q 

CII. IV 
26. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 186. 
305 
- 
J 
I 
V.&HASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Having thus doscribed the reasol~cd philosophy of the Sclf, which is the very seed of 
absolnte indepeudence, he now shows that the P u r y a  who has reached that stage of fitness 
is different from any other Purusa, who has not reached that stage of fitness. ' For the 
seer of tire distinction, ceascs tlic curiosity as to the nntllrc and relations of the 6elf.' 
The curiosity as to thc nature of the Self ceases in ttc case af him who possesses 
that curiosity, when lie sees the distinction l~ctween thc Subjectiv~ Pur~lsa and the Objec- 
tive Existence, by the practice and effective nchicven~ent of thc means of the Yoga. As 
to the nihilist who does not possess this curiosity, he is not fit to be taught. There can 
be teaching in the case of him who has pot first ascertained the fact of t h e  existence of 
the Self in the world outsido the present body. Hc cannot, therefore, come to know the 
distinction between tho two and hence in the case of him there cannot bc the possibility 
of any curiosity ceasing to be. 
But the question is. How is the curiosity to know the nature of the Self known to be 
existing in ally mind? Says he for this reason :--'As in the rainy season, &C.' It is inferred 
that there exists some Karma done in the previous birth in the shape of the practice of 
the eight accessories of Yoga or of some portion t1:creof. Vhich is the sccd out of which 
is to grow the knowledge of the reality, and which tcnds towards emnncjp:rtion. And in 
the case of such one, the curiosity to know the nature of the Self m a s t  neczs~arily 
exist without even the necessity of practice, 
-- 
Shows who has not the capacity, by the nuthcrity of the &amis. 
' In the absence, 
& 
Theantithesis is that there is no fruit of nctiol1,therebeingno entity esistingin m- 
other sphere of existence, or say there beiilg no other world beyond this. 
The nihilist 
is ha who likes this view, but does not like the tl~esis, which has the determination of the 
twenty-five tattvas in view. 
The curiosity as to thc nature of thc Self has lwcn clcscribed 
before. Speaks of the thought of him who sees thc distinction :-' This varied change, &C.' 
The meaning is that the curiosity ss to the nature of the Self ceascs in t81& case of him 
who is wise enough to know the distinction.--25. 
Siitra 26. 
k m r i  
11 
11 
m Tad& then. h*-7~. Viveka-nimnam, inclining towards discrimination. 
(m 
6%) h 
Kaivalya, absolute independence. 
PrBghhbram, gravitating 
towards. h y  Chittarn, the mind. 
26. Then the mind inclines 
towards 
discrimi- 
I 
nation and 
gravitates 
towards 
absolute-independence 
The mind which ere now was heavy with sensuous enjoyment and 
tended towards ignorance, takes now the reverse course. 
It is now heavy with independence and tends towards discriminative 
' knodedge.-186. 
/ 

PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
Now describes the nature of the mind of him who secs the distinction :-' The mind' 
is thon'inclined towards discrimination and gravitates towards absolute indcpc~dence. 
a This has been explained.'--120. 
SOtra 27. 
m Tachchhidrep, in the breaks in it. ~
~
R
T
R
!
 
t. 
other thoughts (am). *?W: 
Saqskiirebhvab, 
., 
frcm residua. 
27. In the breaks arise other thoughts from resi- 
V Y ~ S A .  
In the mind inclining towards discriminative knowledge of the 
notions, and which has just entered the &ream of tlw disti~ictivc knowledge 
at the Puruyn ancl Objeciive Existence, other tllougllts appear in the 
' 
intervals such as 
I am,' 'This is mine, ' 'I know,' &c. 
Whence 3 
From previous residan, whose seeds are being c1cstroyecl.--187. 
It may bc so if discriminative knowledge is established in discrimination and never 
inclines towards outward activity. It is, however, seen in.tho casc of one who is begging 
his food, that is, inclined towards outward activity. For this reason says :--'In the breaks 
arise other thoughts from residua.' 
Thoughts (Prqtyaya) arc those by which something is kuown, the essence of the mind. 
By that arises the discrimination of conscio~~sness. It is of him that are shown the notions, 
'1 know,' when absolute freedom is directly shown as separated from anything else. Or 
the forgetfulness that I do not know. As also the egoism with reference to that, '1 am,' 
or ' This is mine.' By previous residna means the residi~a of outgoing activities.--27. 
S 
Hiinam, removal. 
E@m, their. m 
Rledavat, like that of the 
afflictions. &q, UJrtarn, has been described. 
28. Their removal has been described like that of the 
afflictions.-188. 

CH. I V .  
29. Oh7 ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 189. 
307 
I 
VYASA. 
As the afflictions are no longer capable oE budding forth when their 
seed-power has been singed, so. also does not the conserved energy of 
previous residua give birth to notions when its seed-power has been 
singed by the fire of Irnowledge. The residua of knowledge, however, live 
on until the dnty of the mind has been fulfilled. They are, therefore, not 
considered. - 188. 
VBCHASPATI~S 
GLOSS. 
Let that be. But if in tile face of the existence of discriminative knowledge too, 
other thoughts arise, what is the cnusc of their utter removal so that these other thoughts 
may not rise again at all? Bor this reason says 
:-6 
Their removal has been described 
like the afflictions.' The outgoing activities in their potent-ial state are not altogether 
destroyed as long as the discriminative knowledge is not firmly established. In the case 
however of discriminative knowledge being firmly established the other thoughts are 
utterly destroyed and are no longer fit Go be born again. 
By what cause cloc-s it come about that the afflictions born in the ilitervals of discri- 
mination even cease to give birth to other potentialities ? The cause is tllnt the seecl-power 
of the afflictions is burnt up by the fire of discriruiuativo knowledgo. In the same way 
4- 
the resiclua of the outgoing activities are burnt up. 
~ u t  
the residua of outgoing activities arc 60 bo restrailled by the residua of discri- 
min&ive knowledge, and the residua of discrimination are to be restrained by the ~mtcucies 
of pcstrsint. And it has been shown that t h e  potencies of restraint have not the exter- 
nal objectsfor tllcir sphere of operation. The means of rcstrnint are, therefore, to be con- 
sidered. Bor this reason says :-' The residua of knowledge, however, &C.' The residua 
of knowledge are the potencies of higher desirelessness.-28. 
Sa,am&dtdhil~, the trance. 
29. Having no-interest left even in the Highest-In- 
tellec tion there comes f roin constant discrimination, the 
trance known as the Cloud-of-Virtue.---189. 
When this Brbhrnaya has no interest left in the Highest Intellection, 
Ae., .desires nothing even frou that, then unattached even to that, he 

PATANJALI'S YOGA. 
has discriminati~e lrnowlcdge ever present, and thus by destruction of 
the seed-power of potencies, other thoughts are not bo~*n. Then does be 
attain the trance known as the Cloud-of-Virtue.-18% 
-V~~CHAGPATI~S 
GLOSS. 
Thus tho author of the Aphorism having described the Highest Intellection to be the 
means of the restraint of outgoing activities, now speaks of the means of restraining 
even the Highest I~itcllcc 
tion :--l 
Having no iutcrost left w e n  in tlie Highest Iiltellection 
therc comes from constant discrit~iilation the trance known as tlio Cloud of Virtue.' 
By 
that IIighost Intellcctioit, he does not desire the possessioi~ of anything, oven of the power 
of becoming the master of a11 esistcnce. Nay he begins to feel pain cven there. Having 
bccomo desireless cven there By seeing the defect of change, he comes to the possession 
of constant discriminative knowledge (nndisturbed). Explains the same :--6 
Thus unattach- 
cd even to that, &C. ' As long as the notions of outgoing activities exist, the Br&hma{to 
does not come to possess the constant manifestation of discriminative knowledge. When 
howover hc arrives at the stage when all other thoughts cease to exist, then he bccomes 
possessed of bonstaiit discriui~iativc knowledge. 
Then comcs to him the trance known 
as tho Cloud of Virtue (dharma-megha). This is the meaning. nissatisBed with the 
Highest I~ttellcction and dcsiriilg restraint of that eveil, let him practise tho trance 
known as tlm Clond of Virtue. lly the practico of that ha bccomcs constantly poisased 
of discrimiilativc knowledge,-20. 
m: Tatab, thence, 6h-d IUeda-karma, of action and amictions. 
fism: 
Nivli tti!~, the removal. 
30. Thence the removal of actions and afflictions 
By the attainment thereof, the nmiction of Nescience, etc., ;Ire r e  
moved, even to the very root. 
And the good and bad vehicles of action 
are 
uprooted. 
On the afflictions and the actions being removed, 
tile wise man becomes free even while alive (the Jisanrnukta). FIon ? 
Because Unreal Clognitions are the cause of existence. 
No one being free 
from the afliction of Unreal Cognitions is seen being born by anybody 
anymbere.-190. 
VACHASPATIS GLOSS. 
Thus does he become capable of restraining that. And now cleacribes the object 
~ - 2 - f  :-a 
Thence the wmoval of actions and afflictions.' But then how doe8 ib corn* 

On. IV. 
l 
ON ABSOLUTE INbEPENDERCB, 191. 
309 
pass that the wise become free while yet in thc bonds of life ? Gives the answer :--'Be- 
cause, &C.' 
It is the vehicle of action grown strong by the residua of afiiictions and ac- 
tions that surely becomes the cause of lifc-state, &C.' 
And when there is no root,the. 
L 
r 
shoots thereof cannot exist. As says on this subject the revered ~ k p ~ B d a : - - ~ B y  
not 
seeing the birth of one who has no desired-80. 
T,zd&, then. mh- 
Sarva-Bvnraqa, msla, apetnsya, from which is 
relnoved (*) 
all (Bb) obscuring (m) 
impurities (W). m JALnnsqa, of know- 
ledgo. W*, 
Anantyiit, because of the infinitv 
., of. 
Jfieyam, the knowable. 
m, Alpam, but little. 
31. The linowable is but little then, because of 
knowledge havingbecome-infinite, on account of the re- 
moval of a11 obscuring impurities. -191. 
;FF*M&TW 
mmr-'rm~q 
I a: 
$w5ddb 
wmmm' 
WB& I m 
m 7 d  wi%+r 
T a r n  a&qp.srf&i 
vie& I m 
i;r*na&&rrw+ aaRr 
W r n W T p q  I mqmqwqerC 
?m& 
I  met d w  
l *- 
=m~* 
I m3 r r h b m ~ d ~ d & ~ m  
L 
q I 
nq-afqfsvq- 
II PP II 
VYASA. 
Knowledge when rid of -all tl~e impurities of aRiction and action, 
becomes inhite. The essence of 
ltnowleclge covered by the veil of 
Tamas, is but seldom sl~own forth a d  becomes capable of recognition by 
the activity of I(nj;m 
IIcre, when all the impurities lmve been removed, 
then lrnowledge becomes infinite. Wl~eli knowledge becomes infinite, 
but little remains to kuow, like the sllining insect in space. On this it 
has been said :-' Tlie Lli~id nlnn pierced the pond : the fingerless put a 
thread into it ; the neckless wore it and the tongueless praised it.'--l N. 
V~~CHASPATI~S 
GLOSS. 
Now clcscribes tho state of the mind at t h e  time when the Cloud of Virtue has been 
reached :-' The knowable is but little then because of knawledge having become infinito 
on account of their removal of obscuring impurities. The impurities which cover up the 
essence of the mind, are spoken of as thc obscuring impurities. These are t h e  afRictions 
and actions. When t h e  mcntal essence is frecd from alloy these obscuring impurities, 
knowledge, i. e., t h e  power of knowing becomes infinite, i.e., immeasurable, and therefore 
the knowable remains but little. A s  in the season after the rains, the sun being frecd 
of the clouds shines brightly all round and his light becomes infinitely s t r o ~ g ,  and for 
this reason, the jar and other such things that are to be lighted remain but little, so 
also the light of the essence of the mind, when freed from the Rajas and Tamas, becdmes 
infinite, and but little remains fo be lighted up. 
Says the same :-' When that becomes 
freed f r ~ m  
all the impurities &c. Renders the same plainer by means of the canon & 

difference :-4 
When overpowered, &C.' 
The meaningisttrat the Tamas is put into motion 
by the active Rajas and is for this very reason camied -away from the place. For this 
very reason it is called the Cloud of Virtue, inasmuch as it pours forth showers of light 
upon all the virtues of things to be known. 
Well, this trance, the Cloud of Virtne, illay be the cause of the calming down of fho 
vehicle of actions along with the afflictions and the residua ; but then how is i b  that when 
the Cloud of Virtue makes its appearance, the man is not born again ? Hor this reason 
says :-'As 
has been said on the subject.' 
If ail effect can be brought into existence even when the caose no longer exists, then 
the acts of piercing the pearl, &C., may well be performed by blind people, &c. Or, it may 
well be that whatever nonsense an ignorant world may talk about iuqxoper things, may 
L 
be considered as very propw.-31. 
SCltl-a 32. 
m: 'rat&, by that. mh, 
Krit Rrthbnbm, having fulfilled their obj wt. 
Yariq&ma, of the changes. m Krama, of the succession. m%: Sarnbptib, end. 
p
q
 
Gupbnh, of the qualities. 
32. By that, the qualities having fulfilled their 
object, the succession of their changes ends.-192. 
By that, i.e., by the rise of the Cloud of Virtue, the s~iccession of 4110 
object, by having achieved experience and emancipation, ancl their succes- 
sion having ended, they no longer care to stay even for a moment,-192. 
:I 
~ A ~ H A S P A T I ~ S  
GLOSS. 
j b l l ,  the highest culmination of the Cloud of Virtue being the purity of the light 
of knowledge, which is the samc as the Higher desirelcssncjs, it may ~vcll aproot the 
potencies of the vehicles of outgoing activities and of trance together with the vehicles 
of afRiotions and actions. But the qualities arc of the nature of 
thitlgs which go 
on performing thcir actions of their own power. HOW is it then that thcy do not go on 
making the same sort of a body for such Yogis as they do for all nlcn ? Bor this reason 
says :-4 
By that, qualities having fulblled t h e i ~  object, the succcssioll of thcir changes 
ends.' The inenning is that the nature of the clualitios, that thcy do not function with 
respect to him for whom thcy have already achieved thcir object.--32. 
wrnsfhibfi &mrmr;aisrqh: 
: 
11 33 11 
m K ~ p a ,  
of moments; 
afiiitrC~ Pratiyogi, the uninterrupted sequence. VM 
ParipLrna, of evolutionary change. V Aparbnta, on the cessation. rmfcs: NigriL- 
by&, to be cognised as distinct. m: Kramah, succession. 

In. IV. 
33. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 193. 
v 
311 
r 
33. Succession is the unin terrupted-sequence of mo- 
ments, cognised as distinct on the cessation of evolutionary 
change.-193. 
*d m it* 
l wmrf?ariff PfimmmraaflFmt smr: l qmnm 
m d h  d b m m w ~ ? M r d m  
q ~ b  
m: I a
r
n
~
~
wimr*md'$r~R~~awi@ 
m:r&W Mmw q~Psasmr Pftmr- 
# R m m a ~ m ~ B m m  
W
I
-
T
~
~
I
 
q
m
-
 
mma mB ?r &dt ~Fwq 
I J U ~ W  a a~m~wmf~rtt4 
* 
p9tfZ3 Pftmr~m<lakcrfm: %itt W 
* 
@mm- 
mhn: I qzwi?3$ a619wmRG3 gqp* 
awxfhar W$&- 
m a  @ ammem$$m: a q ~ h  
afwr^a~imgwqtrr wwa * 
I 
&-W 
R m  WIT 
a @q ahnlrmfw mmrkif aftr I WW- 
Biit-aq 
I wtq I 
na maaa%w 
ar3r RRW& 
wi%d 
m@r 
I * - % t w m a f & r f l R e % ? ? n  aFFm*-b~.r?p- 
~qf&mn&: 
p i t i m :  qp3t ';r sTasm wq. 
I m 
qwad?~: 
m ilt&h?%3 QR@ hm iw;t.cr: m: ~qpd%gnt 
Swft -qtfTqwf&im 
Qf& I ari zwrh m: & m ? ~ s 9 m m ~ ~
-rma 
I wmmk ~
~
K
~
u
I w w a w d i s  
mkkm* m 
11 33 11 
V Y ~ S A .  
Well, but what is this succession ? ' Succession is the unin tern~pt- 
ecl flow of moments ; it is taken in by last end, the cessation of  change^. 
A cloth which has not undergone- the succession of moments, does not 
give up its newness and become old all at once in the end. 
Further, succe~sion is found in the permanent also. This perma- 
nence is two-fold, the Eternal in Perfection ; and the Etemat in Evo'lution. 
Of these, the perfect eternity belongs to the Puruga. The evolutionary 
eternity belong8 to the qualities. The Permanent or Eternal is that in 
which the substance i~ not destroyed by changing appearances. Both 
are permanent because their substance is never destroyed. 
Now with regard to the appearances of the qualities, the Will-to-be 
and others, succession has an end which is cognized by the cessation of 
the changes. 
In the eternal qualities however, whose appearances them 
are, it has no end. In the case of the Permanent ones, the existence of 
the released Purusas who are established in their own natures, is aka 
known by succession. In their case too, therefore, it has no end. It is 
however conceived there, with reference to the necessary conccp tion of 
tJhe act of being attached ta tho word, 

But then is there or is there not an end to the suweaaion of evo 
lutionary change:ee of the universe, which is ever present in the qdities, 
L 
by m~tion or by cessation oE motion ? This cannot be answered as euch. 
i 
How ? 
There is a question to which only s onesided answer may be 
given :-'All 
that is born must die and having been dead be born again.' 
Well, but if the question is pnt in this form- 
Is it that all tliat is born must die, and having been dead be born 
again ? 
The answer that can be given to this-is not-a single one but must 
be divided in two. 
He in whom the light of knowledge llas appeared, and whose desires 
have been destroyed, that wise Inan is not born ; the rest are born. SimL 
lady the question is, Is mankind good or not ? The answer is again to 
be divided in two. The humsnkind is better in comparison with the 
animals, but is inferior in comparison with gods and seers (Ri~ie 
j. 
Ae to the question, Has the universe an end or has it not ? W h y  
this question cannot be answered as such? For the wise there is c m  
sation of the successions of the universe. Not for the others. There is 
defect in formulating any other theory. Hence the question must neces- 
sarily he divided into two.-193. 
V~CHASPATI*~ 
GLOSS. 
Puts a question in the context about the sucaeseion of changes ( k m & )  :A Well but 
what is this eucoession?' The answor Is :-a 
8ucccssiou is tlm uninterrupted sequence of 
momonta cognized as distinct on the cessation of evolutionary change.' 
That to whioh is mutunlly related tho moment mloting bsobwarcl and forward to 
the moment of the eucoeesion of changes is BO called. The meaning is that succeesion i. 
that which is tho support of a group of moments. There can of coltree be no encoeesion 
mcertained without the existcsnco of that of which it is the succession. Nor can thsw be 
a succession of one moment only. The inference by residue therefore points only to the 
l 
dependence therool upon a group of moments. Says this :-' Succession is the uninterrupb 
flow, h.' btentione authority for the existenoo of the snc~ession of changes :-It 4 
bken in by the last end, the cessation of changes. 
Even in new cloth preserved with care, oldness becomes visible after a long tim& 
This is the last end of change, otherwise called its ceasation. It is for this very reamn 
that a sucoession of change exists. And before that too is inferred the s m s l ~ ,  
the 
greater smaTlness and the greakst smallness as well as the grossness, the greater 
rrmallnees and the greatest smallnese of oldness in regular sequence of one after the other. 
Shows the same by the oanon of difference:-'A 
cloth which has not undergone, 
h.' That which has not b e n  eubjected to the successior. of moments, ie spoken oi ar 
not having undergone that. 
Well, but this suceession cannot bo posited of the Pradhlln@eoawe that !a etern& 
FOP this reason says:--'~ucceesion is seen in those that are permanent. By urriog 
plural number shows that eucceseion pervades all permanent objects, 

CH. W .  33. ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDEhCE, 193. 
I 
Now shovm the modes of permanence and then establishes how succession pervader 
the eternal :-6 
Permanenoe is t~O-fOld, b.' 
Well, the constantly eternal may be eternal, because it never gives up its nature 
such aa it is. A s  to the ohanging substances, they are constantly giving up their appear- 
ances ; how can thoy be called permanent? For this reason says :-' The Permanent or 
Eternal is that, 60.' 
Characteristia, secondary quality and condition possess the 
qdalities of appearance and disappearance ; the chawoterized however remains the same 
in s~bstance, 
Well, are all anccessions known by the ce~sation of changes? &ye, No :--'Now with 
regard to the appearances of the qualities, the Will-to-be, etc.' Because the s u o ~ e e  
sion of the characteristics ends on account of their being destructible. Not so however 
the sucaeseion of the Pradhhns ends. 
Well, t h e  Pradhlna might be said to be possessed of the snccesaion of ohangeq 
because of the change of its characteristics. 
But the Pornp never changes. How 
then can there be a change of succession in the case of the unchanging Puruga? Yor 
this reason says :-4 
In those that a m  constantIy permanent, &C.' 
There in the case of those that ara bound, they have the notion of non-separatiou 
from the mind ; there is therefore a\ fastening of the change on tl~em on account of the 
changes of the mind. In the cam of those however that have been released, the existence 
of an unreal change has been fancied by ignorance with reference to the action of the 
word to be. Because t b  word precedes, fancy comes thereafter and p u b  on the appear- 
ance of t h e  action of the word to be. 
It has been said thab the succession of changes does not find an end in the qualities. 
Not suffering that assertion puts the question, ' Is there an end to succession, &a.'? 
Cessation of motion means the Great Latency, the BZaMpralaya. Motion eignifiee 
creation. This is the meaning. 
If there were no end of the change of the nniverse ( 6 a ~ s h a )  
on account of eternity, 
how then ehould it be in the Great Latency, that all the Purusas should all at once 
have an end of the succession of changes in their case, and again should the same 
succession of changes coma into being all at once at the beginning of a manifestation? 
byor this reason it would follow that one Puruga alone being released, the nniverse of 
evolution would cease to exist for all, and thus all the Purusas would become releasd. 
In this way would come the end of the succession of the changes of the Pradhiina, and 
the Yradhana also would thus come to be impermanent. 
Rurther it ia not allowed that the manifestation of existence which did not exist 
before is possible, and this assertion cannot therefore be taken to prove its infhity. 
When this becomes the case, it can no longer be said that the PradhBna is beginningless. 
All the teachings of the d~stras 
thus come to be futile. This is the meaning. 
Gives the answer:-It 
cannot be answered; the question does not deserve to be 
answered. With the object of showing that this question cannot be answered, shows 
a question which admits of a one-sided answer. ' There is a question, &C.' 
The answer 
to the question, W11 all those that a r e  born die? is Yes. This is true. Now speaks 
of a question which admits of an answer after being divided into two :-Are 
all those 
that are born bound to die and dying be born again? The answer that can be given 
to this is only possible after a division. 
In order to make the matter clear, mentions another question which admits of an 
answer only after being divided:-'Similarly 
the question, &C.' This question does not 
admit of a one-sided answer, It is impossible to say that the evolution of the wise 
and unwise is in general indefinite or finite. There can be no community between them. 
40 

PBTANJALJ'S YOGA. 
$ 
This is eimnar to the impoesibility of ammrtPining the goodnem or otherwh of 
every living being all at oncm The same is the cam with the death of one who is jamb 
~i 
i 
born. Thb can, hobever, be seaertained .iter a division. @ye t h h  :-The wise mm 
d 
b not born, &a This is the meaning. 
The infemnoe is. that there being emnoipation of all in the auw of the freedom 
of one only from mooesaion, fhe world must oome to end. And this dependr upon the 
emancipation proved to exist by the authority of the dbtme. Tbim here L the authority 
of the means of LnowIedge known as verbal authority, which establishw the emanoipabiea 
u~derstod. HOW 
can it be that the same 6~straa shonld, by a certain teaobing of theins, 
stultify another authority of the dltras establishing the eternity of the modtficatim 
of the PradhBna? Therefore, the inferenoe -which militatee against the authority of 
the &ama cannot be coasidered an rmthot.ity. It is ot course in the Veda, t h e  Brn~iW 
I 
and the Pnrgnae that the aucaeeaion of creation after creation is without beginning 
and withoat end. Further it is not; p~asible that all the soul8 should cease Ito be born 
and die all at once. Even in fhe oaw of learnad men who have been praatising and 
working for more lives than one to achieve disoriminative bowlodge, this knowledge 
does not become well established. How is it then p o ~ i b l e  that in the osre of all living 
beings, whether they belong to th6 class of the moving or the nnmoving ere~~tares, 
16 
tijhould manifest all at once by eome chance P 
J 
Further it i8 not proper that the effmts should msnifeat at one and- tbe same time 
I 
althongh the aauses are not in eri&enoe at one and the name time. In the case of the 
manifestation of discriminative knowledge by ~ucoession, innamemble souls may be 
released by sncawsion, bat the destruction of the universe will not tollow, beanwe 
creatnree are inflnite and innumerable. Thne all is plain.-88, 
~uru~artha-dth~&n&xn, 
of those that are devoid of the object 
of the Puruaa. m 
Qn~$n$m, of the qualities. afibnrr: Pratipraet~vab, becoming 
latent. b m y  Kaivalysm, absolute freedom. 
Fhrsrbpa-pratie)U, mtablish- 
ed in ite own nstnro. r V&, or. WiMik: ~hiti-hktih, the power d coneciousneer* 
fi K, so, thus. 
34. Absolute freedom . comes when the quditi'es, 
becoming devoid of the object of the Puruea, become latent ; 
or the power of consciousness becomes established in 
its own nature.--194. 
/ 
VYA~A. 

&l. IV. 5 34. 
ON ABSOLUTE INDEPENDENCE, 194. 
315 
I 
It has been said that absolute freedom comes when the succession 
of the functioning of the qualities in the performance of their duties ia 
over. Its nature is now ascertained. Absolute freedom is the latency 
d the qualities on becoming devoid of the object of the Puruga, or it 
is the power of consciousness established in its own natnre. Absolute 
freedom ie the becoming latent by inverse process, of the qualities, when 
they are devoid of the object of the Purusa, after having achieved the 
experience and emancipation of the md. 
The powerrof consciousness is absolute when it is not again limited. 
-1 94. 
Thus ends the commentary of Vylsa, the 8ah.khya-pravachana, the Fourth Chapter 
a5 b.bf3olute Freedom. THE BOOR 
&3 BINISHED. 
V&XXASPATI'S GLOSS. 
Describe8 the connection of the aphorism defining the nature of a absolute freedom 
(kaivalya) with the previous aphorism :-'It has been said, &C.' Absolute freedom is the 
becoming latent of the qualities when they become devoid of the objects of the Poruya.' 
The beooming latent of the qualities in their cause, the Pradhiina, when they are 
devoid of the objects of the Puruga, having achieved them :-The 
out-going and the 
trance and the inhibitive petencies of the qualities which appear both as the causes 
and the effectg, become latent in the mind. The mind becomes latent in the principle 
of egoism. The principle of egoism becomes latent in the' undifferent iated phenomenal, 
and the undifferentiative phenomenal into the noumenal. 
This backward disappearance of the qualities which appear as both t h e  causes and 
the effects, is called absolute freedom of the Purusa, in relation to the Prnclhana from 
which he is released. Or, freedom is the estabfishment of the Yurusa in his own 
nature. Says this, ' Or, it is the power, Le.' 
Inasmuch as in the MahApraiaya, too, the 
power of consciousness is established in its own nature, but that is not Moksa, he 
says :-' Does not come into relationship again, &C.' The word ' IT1 ' in the aphorism meany' 
the end of the book. 
.In this Chapter have been described the mind 'fit for freedom, and the trance known 
as the Cloud of Virtue, for establishing the Parup, as he appears in the other ~ o r l d ;  
also 
two descriptions of Mnkti have been described and other things also by context. 
The root of the afflictions has been described, ss also the afflictions ; both the Yogae 
are described together with the eight accessories. The way of Moksa in the shape of 
the knowledge of the di&inction between the Purugra and the qualities has been 
rendered plainer. Absolute freedom has been ascertained b be the power of eonscious~. 
ness free from the afflictions. 
Thus ends the Fourth Chapter of Absolute Freedom in the 016s~ of Vdchaspati Mi&a 
on the Commentary of VyOsa.--34. 
OM TAP SAT. 
For the service of Brahma. 







